S
y
m
a
n
t
e
c
 e
n
t
e
r
p
r
iS
e
 S
e
c
u
r
it
y
Symantec Internet Security Threat Report
trends for July–December 07
 Volume Xiii, published april 2008
Executive Summary
the Symantec Internet Security Threat Report provides a six-month update of worldwide internet threat 
activity. it includes analysis of network-based attacks, a review of known vulnerabilities, and highlights 
of malicious code. it also assesses trends in phishing and spam activity. this summary of the Internet 
Security Threat Report will alert readers to current trends and impending threats that Symantec has 
observed for the six-month period from July 1 to December 31, 2007.
Symantec has established some of the most comprehensive sources of internet threat data in the  
world. the Symantec™ Global intelligence network encompasses worldwide security intelligence data 
gathered from a wide range of sources, including more than 40,000 sensors monitoring networks in 
over 180 countries through Symantec products and services such as Symantec DeepSight™ threat 
management System and Symantec™ managed Security Services, and from other third-party sources. 
Symantec gathers malicious code reports from over 120 million client, server, and gateway systems 
that have deployed its antivirus product, and also maintains one of the world’s most comprehensive 
vulnerability databases, currently consisting of over 25,000 recorded vulnerabilities (spanning more 
than two decades) affecting more than 55,000 technologies from over 8,000 vendors. Symantec also 
operates the Bugtraq™ mailing list, one of the most popular forums for the disclosure and discussion 
of vulnerabilities on the internet, which has approximately 50,000 direct subscribers who contribute, 
receive, and discuss vulnerability research on a daily basis. 
as well, the Symantec probe network, a system of over two million decoy accounts in more than  
30 countries, attracts email from around the world to gauge global spam and phishing activity.  
Symantec also gathers phishing information through the Symantec phish report network, an  
extensive antifraud community of enterprises and consumers whose members contribute and  
receive fraudulent Web site addresses for alerting and filtering across a broad range of solutions. 
these resources give Symantec’s analysts unparalleled sources of data with which to identify, analyze, and 
provide informed commentary on emerging trends in attacks, malicious code activity, phishing, and spam. 
the Symantec Internet Security Threat Report gives enterprises and consumers essential information to 
effectively secure their systems now and into the future.
Dean Turner
executive editor
Director, Global intelligence network
Symantec Security response
Marc Fossi
manager, Development
Symantec Security response
Eric Johnson
editor
Symantec Security response
Trevor Mack
associate editor
Symantec Security response
Joseph Blackbird
threat analyst
Symantec Security response
Stephen Entwisle
threat analyst
Symantec Security response
Mo King Low
threat analyst
Symantec Security response
David McKinney
threat analyst
Symantec Security response
Candid Wueest
analyst
Symantec Security response
Symantec internet Security threat report 
2
the Symantec Internet Security Threat Report consists of four reports: the Global Internet Security Threat 
Report, the EMEA Internet Security Threat Report, for europe, the middle east, and africa (emea) region; 
the APJ Internet Security Threat Report, for the asia-pacific/Japan (apJ) region; and the Government 
Internet Security Threat Report, which focuses on threats and trends that are of specific interest to 
organizations in government and critical infrastructure sectors. 
this Internet Security Threat Report Executive Summary brings together the common threads represented 
in these four reports to provide an analysis of the continuing evolution of the internet threat landscape.  
it is also intended to draw attention to key findings that not only show regional differences, but also  
show how activity in these regions affects global malicious activity.
as security administrators and end users adapt new measures to resolve security threats, attackers  
must create new and innovative ways to attain their objectives. as a result, the threat landscape is 
constantly shifting. the ensuing changes have been evident over the last six months of 2007. Based  
on the data collected during this period, Symantec has observed that the current security threat  
landscape is predominantly characterized by the following:
• malicious activity has become Web-based 
• attackers targeting end users instead of computers
• underground economy consolidates and matures 
• rapid adaptability of attackers and attack activity
Malicious activity has become Web-based 
in the past, traditional attack activity primarily used widespread, broadcast attacks aimed at computers 
deployed on networks. However, as administrators and vendors fortified perimeter defenses with tools 
such as firewalls and intrusion detection/prevention systems (iDS/ipS), attackers responded by adopting 
new tactics. instead of trying to penetrate networks with high-volume broadcast attacks, attackers have 
adopted stealthier, more focused techniques that target individual computers through the World Wide 
Web. this may be driven, in part, by the fact that compromises that affect computers on enterprise 
networks are increasingly likely to be discovered and shut down. On the other hand, activity that 
takes place on end users’ computers and/or Web sites is less likely to be detected. as a result of these 
considerations, Symantec has observed that the majority of effective malicious activity has become  
Web-based: the Web is now the primary conduit for attack activity.
Site-specific vulnerabilities are perhaps the most telling indication of this trend. these are vulnerabilities 
that affect custom or proprietary code for a specific Web site. During the last six months of 2007,  
11,253 site-specific cross-site scripting vulnerabilities were documented.1 this is considerably higher  
than the 2,134 traditional vulnerabilities documented by Symantec during this period. 
these vulnerabilities are a concern because they allow attackers to compromise specific Web sites, which 
they can then use to launch subsequent attacks against users. this has shown to be an effective strategy 
for launching multistage attacks and exploiting client-side vulnerabilities. 
 1  as documented by the XSSed project: http://www.xssed.com/about
Symantec internet Security threat report
3
 2 this report was written at end of 2007.
 3  the average patch development time for site-specific cross-site vulnerabilities can be determined by measuring elapsed time between the publication date of the 
vulnerability and the patch date by the maintainer of the affected Web site.
Symantec has also observed that attackers are particularly targeting sites that are likely to be trusted by 
end users, such as social networking sites. this increases the likelihood that the attacks will be successful 
because a user is more likely to allow a trusted site to execute code on his or her computer, or to open 
a file downloaded from a trusted site. attackers targeting trusted sites can also steal user credentials 
or launch mass attacks because they may allow attacks to propagate quickly through a victim’s social 
network. this is one reason for the shift to site-specific vulnerabilities. 
Site-specific vulnerabilities are also popular with attackers because so few of them are addressed in a 
timely manner. Of the 11,253 site-specific cross-site scripting vulnerabilities documented during this 
period, only 473 had been patched by the administrator of the affected Web site. Of the 6,961 site-specific 
vulnerabilities in the first six months of 2007, only 330 had been fixed at the time of writing.2 in the rare 
cases when administrators do fix these vulnerabilities, they are relatively slow to do so. in the second half 
of 2007, the average patch development time was 52 days, down from an average of 57 days in the first 
half of 2007.3 
another indication of the emergence of the Web as an attack vector is the continued growth in browser 
plug-in vulnerabilities (figure 1). Browser plug-ins are technologies that run inside the Web browser 
and extend the browser’s features. they can include plug-ins that allow additional multimedia content 
from Web pages to be rendered in the browser, such as activeX®. in the second half of 2007, Symantec 
documented 239 browser plug-in vulnerabilities, compared to 237 during the first six months of the year. 
Vulnerabilities — browser plug-in vulnerabilities type v2
03-26-08
Jan–Jun 2007 Jul–Dec 2007
QuickTime® 8%
Acrobat 1%
Mozilla Extensions 1%
Java™ 2%
ActiveX 89%
QuickTime 8%
Java 5%
ActiveX 79%
Flash 5%
Windows Media® Player 2%
Figure 1. Browser plug-in vulnerabilities
Source: Symantec Corporation
Symantec internet Security threat report
these vulnerabilities have remained popular because they are a very effective means of conducting Web-
based attacks. attackers will often compromise a Web site by exploiting site-specific vulnerabilities and 
then use that site to launch shotgun attacks to exploit browser plug-in vulnerabilities.4 the attacker can 
then install malicious software—such as trojans, back doors, and bots—on the compromised computer.
the mpack toolkit that emerged in the first half of 2007 was an example of this complementary 
exploitation of vulnerabilities. mpack is a commercially available, black-market attack toolkit that 
can launch exploits for browser and client-side vulnerabilities against users who visit a malicious or 
compromised Web site. Symantec believes that mpack was professionally written and developed.5 
in august 2007, Symantec observed in-the-wild exploitation of a specific browser plug-in vulnerability, 
the microsoft® DirectX® activeX Vulnerability.6 an exploit for this vulnerability was later incorporated 
into the icepack Web-attack toolkit.7 in the last six months of 2007, Symantec has also detected zero-
day exploitation of many activeX vulnerabilities in the wild, including vulnerabilities in GlobalLink,8 real 
networks realplayer,9 and SSreader ultra Star reader.10 a significant activeX vulnerability was also 
discovered in December 2007 that affected many Hp laptops.11 
malicious code has also evolved to reflect the recent emphasis on Web-based attacks. One signifier of 
this has been the emergence of malicious code that alters Web pages on compromised computers. By 
modifying Web pages, particularly home pages, attackers may be able to alter code on the compromised 
computer or redirect the browser to malicious Web sites that can further compromise the user’s computer. 
Of the top 10 new malicious code families detected during this reporting period, two modify Web pages. 
in the last six months of 2007, seven percent of the volume of the top 50 malicious code samples modified 
Web pages, up from three percent in the first half of the year (figure 2). in the second half of 2006, none 
of the top 50 malicious code samples attempted to modify Web pages on a compromised computer. it is 
likely that the success of threats like the mpack kit has encouraged attackers to use Web pages to install 
malicious code in recent months. 
4
 4  a shotgun attack is one that attempts to compromise a victim by exploiting multiple vulnerabilities. attackers choose this method to improve the likelihood of 
successful compromise since the victim may be patched against some of the vulnerabilities, or there may be other factors that impact the reliability of the attack. 
Sophisticated shotgun attacks also employ browser version detection to avoid attacking clients that do not run vulnerable versions of affected applications. 
 5 http://www.symantec.com/enterprise/security_response/weblog/2007/05/mpack_packed_full_of_badness.html
 6 http://www.securityfocus.com/bid/25279
 7 http://explabs.blogspot.com/2007/09/new-exploit-this-weekend.html
 8 http://www.securityfocus.com/bid/26244
 9 http://www.securityfocus.com/bid/26130
 10 http://www.securityfocus.com/bid/26247
 11 http://www.securityfocus.com/bid/26950
FigXX_MalCodeModWebPg_v1.eps
Period
Jul–Dec 2006 Jan–Jun 2007
3%
Jul–Dec 2007
7%
0%
Figure 2. Malicious code that modifies Web pages
Source: Symantec Corporation
the most widely reported new malicious code family during this reporting period, the invadesys worm,12 
also alters Web pages on compromised computers. users frequently store the pages for personal Web 
sites on their local drive and upload any modified pages. Web pages that are infected by invadesys could 
be uploaded to the user’s hosting provider the next time he or she uploads page modifications. this could 
result in visitors to the user’s site being compromised when they view an infected page.
another indication of the emergence of the Web as the target of malicious activity is the predominant 
malicious code type. For the past few years, worms have been the most common form of malicious code. 
Worms propagate by sending themselves in high volumes of email messages or by exploiting vulnerable 
network services. this typically creates “noise” on the network, increasing the likelihood that network 
administrators will detect the threats and take remedial action. However, over the past year or so, 
attackers have adopted stealthier attack techniques, particularly multistage attacks that use trojans 
to initially compromise a targeted computer, which are less likely to be detected. this has resulted in a 
decline in the use of worms.
During the current reporting period, trojans made up 71 percent of the top 50 potential malicious code 
infections, a slight decrease from the 73 percent in the first half of 2007 (figure 3). Worms made up only 
22 percent of the top 50 potential malicious code infections during this period, unchanged from the first 
half of the year. 
Symantec internet Security threat report
5
 12 http://www.symantec.com/security_response/writeup.jsp?docid=2007-111215-5430-99
Symantec internet Security threat reportF gXX_Mal_Code_T pe_1_v2.eps
0 10 20 30 40 50 7060
Jan–Jun 2007
Jul–Dec 2006
Jul–Dec 2007
80
Percentage of top 50 by potential infections
Type
8%
11%
13%
Back door
73%
60%
71%
Trojan
Virus 10%
5%
15%
Worm 22%
37%
22%
Figure 3. Malicious code types by potential infections
Source: Symantec Corporation
phishing is a malicious activity that is commonly carried out over the Web. a phishing Web site is a site 
that is designed to mimic the legitimate Web site of an organization, often an online bank or e-commerce 
retailer, in order to fool a user into disclosing personal information associated with that organization, 
such as banking credentials, account information and so on. this information is usually used in fraudulent 
activities for financial gain. 
in the last six months of 2007, Symantec observed 87,963 phishing hosts, which are computers that can 
host one or more phishing Web sites. this is an increase of 167 percent from the first half of 2007, when 
Symantec detected only 32,939 phishing Web hosts. Between the second half of 2006 and the second half 
of 2007, Symantec observed a dramatic increase of 559 percent in detected phishing Web site hosts. 
Globally, 66 percent of all phishing Web sites identified by Symantec were located in the united States. 
the majority of brands used in phishing attacks in the last six months of 2007 were in the financial 
services sector, accounting for 80 percent, virtually unchanged from the 79 percent reported in the 
previous period. the financial services sector also accounted for the highest volume of phishing Web sites 
during this period, at 66 percent, down from 72 percent in the first half of 2007 (figure 4). Since most 
phishing activity pursues financial gain, successful attacks using brands in this sector are most likely to 
yield profitable data, such as bank account credentials, making this sector an obvious focus for attacks. 
6
Symantec internet Security threat report
Spam Phishing — phished sector by volume of phishing websites v1
02-20-08
Transportation 0.1%
Computer hardware 0.7%
Insurance 0.11%
0.11% 0.09%
Financial 66%
Retail 11%
ISP 18% Internet
community 3%
Government 1%
Computer consulting 0.09%
0.1%
0.7%
Figure 4. Phished sectors by volume of phishing Web sites
Source: Symantec Corporation
the drop in the volume of phishing Web sites spoofing financial services organizations was likely due to 
a rise in phishing attempts targeting iSps. the iSp sector accounted for the second highest volume of 
phishing attacks during this period, accounting for 18 percent, a significant increase from three percent  
in the first half of the year. 
iSp accounts can be valuable targets for phishers because people frequently use the same authentication 
credentials (such as usernames and passwords) for multiple accounts, including email accounts.13 this 
information may provide access to other accounts, such as online banking. additionally, attackers could 
use the free Web-hosting space often included in these accounts to put up phishing sites, or use the 
accompanying email accounts to send spam or launch further phishing attacks. 
Attackers targeting end users instead of computers
increasingly, Symantec has observed that malicious activity has moved away from targeting computers 
and towards targeting end users themselves. Specifically, attackers are targeting confidential end-user 
information that can be used in fraudulent activity for financial gain. this is a byproduct of the move 
towards financially motivated malicious activity that the Symantec Internet Security Threat Report has 
observed over the past two years.14 
many threats to confidential information are designed specifically to target end users. For instance, a 
keystroke logger targets any and all credentials and sensitive information typed in by the user. it affects 
the user’s confidential information directly rather than affecting the computer or system on which the 
information is stored or transmitted.
7
 13 http://cups.cs.cmu.edu/soups/2006/proceedings/p44_gaw.pdf
 14  For instance, please see the Symantec Internet Security Threat Report, Volume Xi (march 2007),  
http://eval.symantec.com/mktginfo/enterprise/white_papers/ent-whitepaper_internet_security_threat_report_xi_03_2007.en-us.pdf : p. 4
Symantec internet Security threat report
in the last six months of 2007, threats to confidential information made up 68 percent of the volume of 
the top 50 malicious code samples causing potential infections (figure 5). this is an increase over the  
65 percent reported in the first half of 2007 and the 53 percent from the second half of 2006.
threats to confidential information are a particular concern because of their potential for use in criminal 
activities. With the widespread use of e-commerce, particularly online shopping and internet banking, 
compromises of this nature can result in significant financial loss, particularly if credit card information  
or banking details are exposed.
FigXX_Percent_Top_50_v1.eps
Period
Jul–Dec 2006 Jan–Jun 2007
Percentage of top 50 threats that expose
confidential information
65%
Jul–Dec 2007
68%
53%
Figure 5. Threats to confidential information by volume
Source: Symantec Corporation
underground economy servers are black market forums used by criminals and criminal organizations to 
advertise and trade stolen information and services typically for use in identity theft. the distribution of 
goods and services advertised on underground economy servers illustrates the growing focus on end users 
and their financial and personal information, such as bank account credentials, credit card information, 
and identities. 
Over the last six months of 2007, Symantec observed that data related to identities, credit cards, and 
financial details accounted for 44 percent of the goods advertised on underground economy servers this 
period. Bank accounts were the most commonly advertised item for sale on underground economy servers 
known to Symantec, accounting for 22 percent of all items, an increase from the first half of 2007, when 
they represented 21 percent of the total (table 1).
8
Symantec internet Security threat report
One reason for the continued popularity of bank account credentials may be partly due to the increase 
in the number of banking trojan infections in the second half of 2007. the number of potential banking 
trojan infections increased 86 percent from the previous reporting period, which likely increased the 
number of bank account credentials stolen and their availability on underground economy servers during 
this period.
One prominent example of a banking trojan detected during this reporting period was the Silentbanker 
trojan.15 this malicious code can be used to steal a user’s online banking credentials and divert legitimate 
transactions. it includes sophisticated mechanisms to steal funds from a user’s online banking account. 
Silentbanker is also able to modify information in the transaction summary Web page that the bank 
displays to the user, fooling the user into thinking that the transaction has been successfully completed.
Underground economy consolidates and matures 
in the previous volume of the Symantec Internet Security Threat Report, one of the recurrent themes that 
Symantec discussed was the increased professionalization and commercialization of malicious activities.16 
During this reporting period, this tendency has continued to the point that Symantec believes that it has 
evolved into a mature, consolidated underground economy. this economy is characterized by a number  
of traits that are present in more orthodox economies, including:
• Specialization of production of goods and services
• Outsourcing of production
• multivariate pricing
• adaptable business models
Specialization of production of goods and services
the specialization of production of goods and services is an indication of a mature, consolidated economy. 
Specialized production of goods and services means that individuals will focus on one specific task or job, 
which is generally done for two reasons: because an economy has evolved enough that individuals can 
successfully specialize in a specific area; and to take advantage of the economic efficiencies presented 
when one individual or group performs only one activity. 
in the previous Internet Security Threat Report, Symantec noted that malicious threats that attackers 
had previously performed separately were consolidating across the globe into networks of coordinated 
malicious activity. this has been made possible by the specialized production of those malicious goods 
and services.
in the last six months of 2007, Symantec detected 499,811 new malicious code threats (figure 6).  
this is a 136 percent increase over the previous period when 212,101 new threats were detected and a 
571 percent increase over the second half of 2006. in total, Symantec detected 711,912 new threats in 
2007 compared to 125,243 threats in 2006, an increase of 468 percent. this brings the overall number  
of malicious code threats identified by Symantec to 1,122,311 as of the end of 2007. this means that 
almost two-thirds of all malicious code threats currently detected were created during 2007.
 15 http://www.symantec.com/security_response/writeup.jsp?docid=2007-121718-1009-99
 16  Symantec executive Summary, Internet Security Threat Report, Volume Xii (September 2007),  
http://eval.symantec.com/mktginfo/enterprise/white_papers/ent-whitepaper_internet_security_threat_report_xii_exec_summary_09_2007.en-us.pdf : p. 3
9
N
um
be
r 
of
 n
ew
 t
hr
ea
ts
0
150,000
100,000
50,000
350,000
300,000
550,000
500,000
FigXX_Mal_Code_Threats_v1.eps
Period
250,000
200,000
450,000
400,000
Jul–Dec
2002
6,260
Jan–Jun
2003
9,138
Jul–Dec
2003
8,475
Jan–Jun
2004
20,451
Jul–Dec
2004
42,523
Jan–Jun
2005
48,226
Jul–Dec
2005
53,410
Jan–Jun
2006
50,761
Jul–Dec
2006
74,482
Jan–Jun
2007
212,101
Jul–Dec
2007
499,811
Figure 6. New malicious code threats
Source: Symantec Corporation
the significant increase in new threats over the past year is likely due to the emergence of specialized 
malicious code authors and the existence of organizations that employ programmers dedicated to the 
production of these threats. this is reflective of increased professionalization of malicious activity, which 
has created sufficient demand to create a niche of professional malicious code developers. 
a group of specialized programmers can create a larger number of new threats than can a single malicious 
code author, bringing about economies of scale and, therefore, an increased return on investment. many of 
these threats can be used for financial gain by performing actions such as stealing confidential information 
that can be sold online. these proceeds can then be used to pay the programmers to continue creating 
new threats. the combination of these factors results in a high volume of new malicious code samples  
that threaten users online.
another example of specialization of goods and services is the apparent rise of certain countries  
as leading centers of specific malicious activities. For example, during this reporting period, romania  
was home to the third most phishing Web sites globally, accounting for five percent of all phishing  
Web sites detected, and the most phishing Web sites in emea, with 46 percent of the region’s total. 
although it ranked thirty-fifth worldwide and sixteenth in emea for overall malicious activity, it was  
the fifteenth ranked country in the world for phishing hosts and had the tenth highest number of  
phishing hosts in emea. 
Symantec internet Security threat report 
10
thus it would seem that the amount of phishing activity based in romania is disproportionately high 
relative to the overall malicious activity originating there. these figures would indicate that phishing 
is the most common malicious activity originating in romania, suggesting that attackers there may be 
specializing in that activity. this is borne out by numerous reports that indicate that romania has become 
a growing source of online fraud.17 there is a well-established tradition of computer skills in the country 
dating back to the early 1980s.18 combined with the slow economic growth in romania since the fall 
of communism, and the ensuing lack of employment opportunities, this may have led to an increase in 
phishing activity based there.19 
Outsourcing of production
the specialized production of malicious goods and services is often made possible by the development of 
an outsourcing model of malicious activity. Outsourcing is the practice of having people or organizations 
outside the organization perform certain services. this is usually done to maximize economic efficiencies 
or to acquire skills that may not otherwise be available to the organization. 
as was discussed in the previous section, there was a significant increase in new malicious code threats 
that Symantec detected over the past two reporting periods. it is reasonable to assume that this is the 
result of outsourcing, in which the malicious code authors are paid to create new samples.
automated phishing toolkits are another example of outsourcing. a phishing toolkit is a set of scripts 
that allows an attacker to automatically set up phishing Web sites that spoof the legitimate Web sites 
of different brands, including the images and logos associated with those brands. phishing toolkits 
are developed by groups or individuals and are sold in the underground economy. these sophisticated 
phishing kits are typically difficult to obtain and expensive, and are more likely to be purchased and used 
by well organized groups of phishers, rather than average users. 
the three most popular phishing toolkits that Symantec tracked for this reporting period were responsible 
for 26 percent of all phishing attacks observed by Symantec (figure 7).20 this is a decrease from the first 
half of 2007, when the three most popular phishing toolkits were responsible for 42 percent of all phishing 
attacks. Furthermore, two of the three most popular phishing toolkits tracked by Symantec in the first half 
of 2007 were no longer commonly used in the second half of the year and, as such, are not discussed here. 
Symantec internet Security threat report 
 17 http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/technology/3344721.stm
 18 http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/technology/3344721.stm
 19 http://bucharest.usembassy.gov/uS_citizen_Services/Visiting_Living/corruption.html
 20  unlike legitimate software, where naming plays a large role in marketing the product, phishing toolkits often become popular based on who has produced them.  
as a consequence, phishing toolkits discussed here cannot be named specifically.
11
Spam Phishing — automated phishing toolkits v3
03-27-08
Month
Aug Sep Oct Nov
0%
10%
20%
30%
5%
15%
25%
35%
40%
DecJul
8.76
14.6313.6
5.67
10.64 9.99
33.53
16.5
0
10.32
6.3
11.05
0.72
5.37
2.37
3.15
2.02
0
Phishing toolkit 1
Phishing toolkit 2
Phishing toolkit 3
Pe
rc
en
ta
ge
Figure 7. Use of automated phishing toolkits
Source: Symantec Corporation
these numbers indicate that the popularity of phishing toolkits changes quickly, which reflects the need 
for phishers to adapt in order to avoid detection by antiphishing software. this is likely the driving factor 
behind the dramatic upward spike and subsequent decline of phishing toolkit 3 during this period. its drop 
in popularity between august and October probably occurred because the phishing kit was identified by 
antiphishing software, and so became ineffective and had to be replaced. the change in phishing toolkits 
during this reporting period also indicates that the number of toolkits is increasing and that attackers are 
using a greater number of different toolkits, resulting in the total amount of attacks being distributed over 
more toolkits. 
Multivariate pricing
the underground economy now appears to be characterized by pricing that is affected by a number of 
market forces, particularly supply and demand. the price range of credit cards in the last half of 2007 
remained consistent with the prices from the first half of the year, ranging from $0.40 to $20 uSD per  
card number (table 1). 
Symantec internet Security threat report 
12
Current
Rank
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Previous
Rank
2
1
7
N/A
8
4
5
3
N/A
6
Goods and Services
Bank accounts
Credit cards
Full identities
Online auction site accounts
Scams
Mailers
Email addresses
Email passwords
Drop (request or offer)
Proxies
Current
Percentage
22%
13%
9%
7%
7%
6%
5%
5%
5%
5%
Previous
Percentage
21%
22%
6%
N/A
6%
8%
6%
8%
N/A
6%
Range of Prices
$10–$1000
$0.40–$20
$1–$15
$1–$8
$2.50/week–$50/week for hosting, 
$25 for design
$1–$10
$0.83/MB–$10/MB
$4–$30
10%–50% of total drop amount
$1.50–$30
TableXX_UndGrndEconServ_v2.eps
Table 1. Breakdown of goods and services available for sale on underground economy servers
Sourc : Symantec Co poration
two of the main factors affecting the cost of credit cards on underground economy servers were the 
location of the issuing bank and the rarity of the card. cards from the european union cost more than 
those from the united States. One reason for the higher prices may be due to the availability of credit 
cards. it is estimated that there are approximately eight times the number of credit cards in circulation  
in the united States than the european union.21 rarer cards, such as those from smaller countries or 
smaller credit card companies, were typically twice as expensive as their more popular counterparts. 
credit cards issued by banks in the united States constituted 62 percent of the total credit cards 
advertised in the last half of 2007. this represents a drop from 85 percent in the first half of 2007,  
but is still significantly higher than cards from other countries. the ready supply of cards from the  
united States has likely driven down prices relative to those of other countries. 
Symantec observed that the cost of full identities depended on the location of the identity. as with  
bank accounts and credit cards, eu identities were advertised at prices 50 percent higher than u.S. 
identities. this would indicate that demand for these identities was higher than for those based in the 
united States. along with their availability, this may also be due to the flexibility of their use, since  
citizens in the european union are able to travel and conduct business freely throughout the region 
without a passport. this flexibility may be useful to attackers and criminals who could use the identities 
easily across all eu countries.
another pricing phenomenon that Symantec saw on underground economy servers during this reporting 
period is bulk pricing. in order to take advantage of economic efficiencies and entice buyers, sellers will 
offer reduced prices on larger volumes of goods for sale. Some bulk amounts and rates observed by 
Symantec during the last six months of 2007 were 50 credit card numbers for $40 uSD ($0.80 each), and 
500 credit card numbers for $200 uSD ($0.40 each). this is a decrease from the bulk rates advertised in 
the first half of 2007, when the lowest bulk purchase price identified was $1 uSD each for 100 cards. 
Symantec internet Security threat report 
 21 http://www.ecb.int/stats/payments/paym/html/index.en.html and http://www.bis.org/publ/cpss78p2.pdf
13
as well, identities were available in bulk, at $100 uSD for 50 items. Full identities were the third most 
common item advertised for sale on underground economy servers, making up nine percent of all 
advertised goods, an increase from six percent in the first half of 2007. the popularity of full identities 
may be due to their versatility, ease of use, and inclusion of additional information on individuals.
pricing on the underground economy also appears to be subject to value-added incentives. For instance, 
bank account information for accounts that included higher balances, such as business accounts, and 
eu accounts, were advertised for considerably more. Furthermore, in some cases, bank accounts that 
bundled in personal information—such as names, addresses and dates of birth—were advertised at 
higher prices than those without this extra information.
Adaptable business models
a mature, consolidated economy is characterized by the development and implementation of specific 
business models that are suitable to the prevailing conditions in the economy. Symantec has observed 
that organizations and individuals currently operating within the underground economy appear willing 
and able to change their business models or adopt new ones in response to changes in the threat 
landscape.
this change of business model is apparent in the sale of credit cards on underground economy servers. 
During the current reporting period, credit cards were the second most commonly advertised item on 
underground economy servers, accounting for 13 percent of all advertised goods. this was a decrease 
from 22 percent in the first six months of 2007 (table 1). 
the decrease in credit cards being advertised may be due to several reasons. With several recent high-
profile reports on lost credit card data, credit card companies may be more diligent in monitoring 
customers’ credit card activities and quicker to inform customers of suspicious transactions, subsequently 
reducing the window of opportunity for criminals to exploit stolen credit cards. it is also becoming more 
difficult to cash out credit cards as many wire transfer companies and currency exchange services do not 
accept them as a form of payment for all countries.22 
Because of this, attackers may be seeking different sources of financial information. Likely as a result, 
bank account credentials, including account numbers and authentication information, were the most 
frequently advertised item during this period, making up 22 percent of all goods. this was a slight 
increase from 21 percent in the first half of 2007.
Symantec internet Security threat report 
 22 http://www.asianagold.com/faq.html
14
Rapid adaptability of attackers and attack activity
the threat landscape is arguably more dynamic than ever. this is driven by rapid adaptability of attackers 
and attack activity in response to security measures that are continually developed to protect the 
computers of end users and organizations.
in some cases, this adaptability takes the form of geographic mobility, particularly in the case of attackers 
who may relocate their operations in order to seek digital safe havens. For instance, one of the most 
noteworthy internet security news items of the second half of 2007 centered on the russian Business 
network (rBn). the rBn is a suspected criminal organization specializing in the distribution of malicious 
code, hosting malicious Web sites, and other malicious activity, specifically the development and sale of 
the mpack toolkit. it has been implicated in widespread malicious activity over the past two years.23 
according to some reports, russian organizations may be responsible for up to 60 percent of phishing 
activity on the internet.24 the third ranked top-level domain (tLD) used by phishing Web sites in the emea 
region during this period was .ru, which was used by seven percent of the total. the .ru tLD is assigned to 
the country domain of russia. Only two percent of global phishing Web sites used this tLD. Furthermore, 
only about 0.5 percent of internet-wide Web sites use this tLD, indicating that phishing Web sites using 
this tLD were heavily concentrated in the emea region. in the first half of the year, russia hosted eight 
percent of phishing Web sites, the fifth highest total in the emea region. many of these likely employed 
the .ru tLD, leading to its prominence in this category. 
rBn was reported to have dropped offline in november 2007, in response to pressure from upstream 
internet service providers.25 However, it appears to have re-emerged in china briefly soon after.26 as a 
result, it is likely that phishing Web sites using the .ru tLD will diminish over the foreseeable future.  
the rapid relocation of the rBn indicates that malicious groups are actively anticipating and planning  
for the need to adapt on the fly. this includes the deployment of back-up servers to which they can  
turn when law enforcement agencies or iSps threaten to shut down existing operations.
Some attackers may relocate to regions in which security practices, legislation and/or infrastructure  
are not particularly well developed. Symantec has noted that, in areas where broadband connectivity  
is new or is rapidly expanding, iSps may be more focused on meeting growing demand than on ensuring 
that adequate security measures are in place.27 Furthermore, in these areas, users and administrators  
are less likely to be familiar with best security practices. Because internet infrastructure either was  
not existent or is still relatively new in these areas, adequate legislation and law enforcement  
measures may not yet be in place. 
the movement of attackers into potentially under-secured areas may result in regionalization of attack 
activity. For instance, several countries that have not traditionally been associated with malicious  
activity featured prominently in various categories during this reporting period. One example is  
romania, which had a surprisingly high number of phishing Web sites during this reporting period,  
as was discussed previously.
Symantec internet Security threat report 
 23 http://www.zdnet.com.au/news/security/soa/infamous-porn-and-phishing-iSp-rolls-Bank-of-india/0,130061744,339281722,00.htm
 24 http://www.smh.com.au/news/security/the-hunt-for-russias-web-crims/2007/12/12/1197135470386.html
 25 http://www.theregister.co.uk/2007/11/08/rbn_offline/
 26  http://www.scmagazineus.com/is-this-the-end-of-the-russian-Business-network/article/96289/ and  
http://www.pcworld.com/article/id,139465-page,1-c,privacysecurity/article.html
 27  For instance, please see the Symantec Internet Security Threat Report, Volume Xi (march 2007),  
http://eval.symantec.com/mktginfo/enterprise/white_papers/ent-whitepaper_internet_security_threat_report_xi_03_2007.en-us.pdf : p. 36
15
another example of attackers adapting to the deployment of new or rapidly expanding technologies  
is the Farfli trojan,28 which was the third most commonly reported new malicious code family in the last  
half of 2007. this trojan changes the search settings for the maxthon and theWorld Web browsers,29  
two Web browsers that have a smaller market share than browsers that are typically more commonly  
targeted by attackers. 
the targeting of these two browsers also illustrates the tendency towards regionalization of attacks. Both 
browsers have been developed and maintained by chinese companies, which may indicate that the author 
of the trojan is specifically targeting chinese users. Further, since the trojan changes the search settings  
to use a popular chinese search engine, this may also indicate that chinese users are being targeted. 
effective security measures implemented by vendors, administrators, and end users have forced attackers 
to adopt new tactics more rapidly and more often. Symantec believes that such a change is currently 
taking place in the construction and use of bot networks. 
Between July 1 and December 31, 2007, Symantec observed an average of 61,940 active bot-infected 
computers per day, a 17 percent increase from the previous reporting period.30 Symantec also observed 
5,060,187 distinct bot-infected computers during this period, a one percent increase from the first  
six months of 2007. However, despite this increase, the number of bot command-and-control servers 
detected by Symantec during this period dropped. in the last six months of 2007, Symantec identified 
4,091 bot command-and-control servers, 11 percent less than the previous reporting period, when  
4,622 bot command-and-control servers were identified (figure 8).
Period
Jan–Jun 2006 Jul–Dec 2006 Jan–Jun 2007
4,622
6,337
4,746
Jul–Dec 2007
4,091
Attacks — bot c&c servers v1
02-15-08
Figure 8. Bot command-and-control servers
Source: Symantec Corporation
Symantec internet Security threat report 
28  http://www.symantec.com/security_response/writeup.jsp?docid=2007-072901-5957-99
 29  maxthon and theWorld are Web browsers that make use of the internet explorer® and Firefox rendering engines. as a result, they behave in a similar manner to 
these browsers and are also susceptible to the same vulnerabilities.
 30  an active bot-infected computer is one that carries out at least one attack per day. this does not have to be continuous; rather, a single computer can be active  
on a number of different days. a distinct bot-infected computer is a distinct computer that was active at least once during the period.
16
attackers appear to be shifting away from traditional irc bot command-and-control communications. 
instead, they are adopting a decentralized command-and-control architecture, thus making their bot 
networks more difficult to detect and disable.31 For example, the peacomm (also known as Storm trojan)32 
and nugache33 trojans establish peer-to-peer (p2p) networks for bot communication. p2p-based bot 
network owners typically use a fast-flux domain name service scheme,34 in which control of the bot 
network is diffused through a number of computers within the network. Because p2p bot networks do 
not have a centralized command-and-control server, they can be broken up into smaller pieces for more 
stealthy operations, making them very difficult to detect and disable. as is discussed in the “Future Watch” 
section of this report, Symantec expects this trend to continue.
another example of attackers’ ability to change tactics to adapt to new circumstances is the change in 
zero-day vulnerabilities that were observed in the second half of 2007.35 Symantec documented nine zero-
day vulnerabilities in the second half of 2007, compared to six zero-day vulnerabilities in the first half of 
2007. all the zero-day vulnerabilities documented during this period targeted specific, regionally oriented 
third-party applications for microsoft Windows®. eight of the nine zero-day vulnerabilities were also client-
side in nature, the majority of which affected activeX components. Seven of the nine targeted popular 
Japanese and chinese language applications such as JustSystem ichitaro, Lhaz, GlobalLink, SSreader 
ultra Star reader, and Xunlei Web thunder. 
thus, it appears that attackers are exploiting zero-day vulnerabilities in regionalized versions of globally 
deployed applications such as microsoft Office. it is likely that there is an active community of attackers 
based in the respective regions who have discovered that it is economically efficient to focus on users 
within their own region, instead of exploiting vulnerabilities with a higher profile on the global scale. 
this makes sense because it is in attackers’ best interest to strike a balance between vulnerabilities that 
affect a large user base versus lower profile attacks that are less likely to draw public attention. High 
profile vulnerabilities are more likely to be patched or mitigated by organizations, whereas there is a 
greater likelihood that lower profile vulnerabilities will remain unpatched for a longer period.
Some new tactics are targeting well established technologies. For instance, the most reported new 
malicious code family in emea during the last half of 2007 was the pidief family.36 instances of malicious 
code belonging to this family were the fourth most commonly reported family globally. pidief exploits 
a vulnerability in adobe pDF reader. Several factors may explain its high ranking for this period. 
Organizations within emea may be more resistant, on average, to the typical malicious code threat.  
there may be more widespread deployment of technologies such as gateway filtering and more user 
awareness in the region than exists, on average, within the global internet community as a whole. as  
well, pDF documents are widely used and trusted within corporate environments, creating the potential  
for widespread propagation through the vector.
the process of rapid adaptation has been made more pronounced by the fact that many threats now 
have built-in adaptability. For instance, staged downloaders have historically used trojans as the first 
component. However, during this reporting period, this role was also filled by viruses like mumawow,37 
which downloads other threats onto a compromised computer. previously, worms and trojans were the 
primary malicious code types that were used as the first stage of multistage attacks. this shows that 
attackers are experimenting and evolving their techniques. Since attackers are always looking for new 
ways to compromise computers, it is not surprising that they have varied their methods by using viruses.
Symantec internet Security threat report 
 31 http://www.darkreading.com/document.asp?doc_id=117924
 32 http://www.symantec.com/security_response/writeup.jsp?docid=2007-011917-1403-99 
 33 http://www.symantec.com/security_response/writeup.jsp?docid=2006-043016-0900-99
 34 http://news.zdnet.com/2100-1009_22-6222896.html
 35  a zero-day vulnerability is one that appears to have been exploited in the wild prior to being publicly known. it may not have been known to the vendor prior to 
exploitation, and the vendor had not released a patch at the time of the exploit activity.
36  http://www.symantec.com/security_response/writeup.jsp?docid=2007-102310-3513-99&tabid=2
 37 http://www.symantec.com/security_response/writeup.jsp?docid=2007-061400-4037-99 
17
the increasing use of firewalls has limited the ability of network worms to propagate and effective file-
attachment blocking has also slowed the distribution of mass-mailing worms. However, there has been 
an increase in the use of removable media in both home and enterprise environments.38 uSB drives are 
increasingly used to transfer files that are too large to email or that consume too much bandwidth over 
the network. these devices are prime targets for traditional file-infector viruses to use for propagation.
the most common means of propagation for malicious code during this period was the sharing of 
executable files, which was used by 40 percent of malicious code that propagates, a significant increase 
from 14 percent in the first half of 2007 (table 2). During this period, this propagation mechanism was 
usually employed by viruses and some worms that copy themselves to removable media. However, in the 
past, it was associated with physical sharing of files, the traditional method employed by the original file 
infector viruses. although current removable drives differ from floppy disks, the principle remains the 
same, enabling attackers to adapt old propagation techniques for new purposes.
Rank
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Propagation Mechanism
File sharing executables
File transfer/email attachment
File transfer/CIFS
File sharing/P2P
Remotely exploitable vulnerability
SQL
Back door/Kuang2
Back door/SubSeven
File transfer/embedded HTTP URI/Yahoo! Messenger
Web
Current
40%
32%
28%
19%
17%
3%
3%
3%
2%
1%
Previous
14%
30%
15%
20%
12%
<1%
2%
2%
<1%
1%
TableXX_PropagationMech_v4.eps
Table 2. Propagation mechanisms
Source: Symantec Corporation
the file sharing vector lost popularity among malicious code authors when the use of floppy disks  
declined and attackers shifted towards more widely used file transfer mechanisms such as email and 
shared network drives. However, as the storage capacity of removable drives has increased and their  
usage has become more widespread, attackers have again begun to employ this propagation technique.
the renewed prominence of this vector is largely due to the increased storage capacity and use of 
removable media, such as uSB keys and portable hard drives. these high-capacity and highly portable 
storage devices allow individuals to easily exchange large amounts of data. as is discussed in the 
“Future Watch” section of this report, Symantec speculates that as these devices continue to increase in 
popularity, attackers and malicious code authors will target them more frequently, adapting their methods 
to take advantage of the new opportunities these technologies may offer.
Symantec internet Security threat report 
 38 http://www.macsimumnews.com/index.php/archive/worldwide_demand_remains_strong_for_mp3_portable_media_players
18
Global Internet Security Threat Report Highlights
the following section provides a summary of the security trends that Symantec observed in the current 
Global Internet Security Threat Report.
Global Attack Trends 
• During this reporting period, the united States accounted for 31 percent of all malicious activity,  
an increase from 30 percent in the first half of 2007.
• the united States was the top country of attack origin in the second half of 2007, accounting for  
24 percent of worldwide activity, a decrease from 25 percent in the first half of 2007.
• the education sector accounted for 24 percent of data breaches that could lead to identity theft  
during this period, more than any other sector. this was a decrease from the previous reporting  
period, when it accounted for 30 percent of the total.
• Government was the top sector for identities exposed, accounting for 60 percent of the total, a 
significant increase from 12 percent in the first half of 2007.
• theft or loss of computer or other data-storage medium was the cause of the most data breaches  
that could lead to identity theft during this reporting period, accounting for 57 percent of the total.  
it accounted for 61 percent of the identities exposed in the second half of 2007, more than any  
other sector.
• the united States was the top country for hosting underground economy servers, accounting for  
58 percent of the total identified by Symantec, a decrease from the first half of 2007, when it  
accounted for 64 percent of the total.
• Bank accounts were the most commonly advertised item for sale on underground economy servers 
known to Symantec, accounting for 22 percent of all items, an increase from the first half of 2007,  
when they accounted for 21 percent of all times.
• Symantec observed an average of 61,940 active bot-infected computers per day in the second half  
of 2007, an increase of 17 percent from the previous period.
• the average lifespan of a bot-infected computer during the last six months of 2007 was four days, 
unchanged from the first half of 2007.
• the united States had the most bot-infected computers, accounting for 14 percent of the worldwide 
total, a slight increase from 13 percent in first half of 2007.
Symantec internet Security threat report 
 
19
• madrid was the city with the most bot-infected computers, accounting for three percent of the 
worldwide total.
• in the last six months of 2007, Symantec identified 4,091 bot command-and-control servers. this is an 
11 percent decrease from the previous reporting period, when 4,622 bot command-and-control servers 
were identified. Of these, 45 percent were located in the united States, more than any other country.
• the united States was the country most frequently targeted by denial-of-service attacks, accounting for 
56 percent of the worldwide total. this is a decrease from 61 percent reported in the first half of 2007.
Global Vulnerability Trends 
• not including site-specific vulnerabilities, Symantec documented 2,134 vulnerabilities in the second 
half of 2007, 13 percent less than the first half of 2007.
• three percent of vulnerabilities documented in this period were classified as high severity, 61 percent 
as medium, and 36 percent as low. in the first half of 2007, nine percent of documented vulnerabilities 
were considered high severity, 51 percent medium, and 40 percent low.
• Fifty-eight percent of vulnerabilities documented in the second half of 2007 affected Web applications, 
down from 61 percent in the first half of 2007.
• Seventy-three percent of vulnerabilities documented in this period were classified as easily exploitable, 
compared to 72 percent in the first half of 2007.
• all operating system vendors except apple and Sun had shorter average patch development times than 
in the previous reporting period. microsoft had the shortest patch development time, at six days; Sun™ 
had the longest patch development time, at 157 days.
• Over half of patched medium- and high-severity operating system vulnerabilities for microsoft, Hp®, 
and Sun in the second half of 2007 were browser and client-side vulnerabilities. During the first half 
of 2007, browser and client-side vulnerabilities composed the majority of patched operating system 
vulnerabilities for all vendors but apple®.
• the window of exposure for enterprise vendors was 46 days in the last six months of 2007, compared  
to 55 days in the previous six months.
• Safari had the shortest window of exposure of any browser in the last six months of 2007, with an 
average exposure of less than one day from a sample set of 18 patched vulnerabilities. Safari™ also had 
the shortest window of exposure during the first six months of 2007, an average of three days from a 
sample set of 13 patched vulnerabilities.
• During the second half of 2007, there were 88 vulnerabilities reported in mozilla browsers, 22 in Safari, 
18 in internet explorer, and 12 in Opera. in the previous six month period, internet explorer was subject 
to 39 vulnerabilities, mozilla to 34, Safari to 25, and Opera to seven.
Symantec internet Security threat report 
20
• Symantec documented 239 browser plug-in vulnerabilities in the last six months of 2007, compared 
to 237 during the first six months. During the second half of 2007, 79 percent of these vulnerabilities 
affected activeX components, compared to 89 percent in the first half. 
• in the second half of 2007, 58 percent of all vulnerabilities affected Web applications. this is less than 
the 61 percent in the first half of 2007.
• Symantec identified 11,253 site-specific cross-site scripting vulnerabilities in the last six months of 
2007, compared to 6,961 in the first half (though with measurement beginning only in February). 
• Symantec documented nine zero-day vulnerabilities in the second half of 2007, all of which affected 
third-party applications for the Windows platform. there were six zero-day vulnerabilities in the first 
half of 2007.
• eighty-eight vulnerabilities that affected enterprise vendors in the second half of 2007 remain 
unpatched at the end of the reporting period. this is an increase over the 81 unpatched enterprise 
vulnerabilities in the first half of 2007. microsoft had the most unpatched vulnerabilities in both 
reporting periods.
• Symantec documented 92 vulnerabilities that affected security products during the second half of 
2007, down from 113 in the first half of the year. Of the 92 vulnerabilities, 15 were classified as high 
severity, 48 as medium, and 29 as low.
Global Malicious Code Trends 
• in the second half of 2007, 499,811 new malicious code threats were reported to Symantec, a 136 
percent increase over the first half of 2007.
• Of the top 10 new malicious code families detected in the last six months of 2007, five were trojans, 
two were worms, two were worms with a back door component, and one was a worm with a virus 
component.
• During the second half of 2007, trojans made up 71 percent of the volume of the top 50 malicious code 
samples, a decrease from 73 percent in the first six months of 2007.
• Forty-three percent of worms originated in the europe, middle east, and africa (emea) region.
• north america accounted for 46 percent of trojans for this period.
• threats to confidential information made up 68 percent of the volume of the top 50 potential malicious 
code infections reported to Symantec.
• Of all confidential information threats detected this period, 76 percent had a keystroke logging 
component and 86 percent had remote access capabilities, a decrease for each from 88 percent in  
the previous period.
• Forty percent of malicious code that propagated did so through executable file sharing, a significant 
increase from 14 percent in the first half of 2007, making this the most commonly used propagation 
mechanism during this period.
Symantec internet Security threat report 
21
• Seven percent of the volume of the top 50 malicious code samples modified Web pages this period,  
up from three percent in the previous period.
• During the second half of 2007, 10 percent of the 1,032 documented malicious code samples exploited 
vulnerabilities. this is lower than the 18 percent proportion of the 1,509 malicious code instances 
documented in the first half of 2007.
• Seven of the top 10 staged downloaders this period were trojans, two were worms, and one was  
a worm with a viral infection component.
• Of the top 10 downloaded components for this period, eight were trojans and two were back doors.
• malicious code that targets online games made up eight percent of the volume of the top 50 potential 
malicious code infections, up from five percent in the previous period.
Global Phishing Trends
• the Symantec probe network detected a total of 207,547 unique phishing messages, a five percent 
increase over the first six months of 2007. this equates to an average of 1,134 unique phishing 
messages per day for the second half of 2007. 
• eighty percent of all unique brands used in phishing attacks were in the financial sector, compared to 
79 percent in the previous period.
• During this period, 66 percent of all phishing Web sites spoofed financial services brands, down from  
72 percent in the first half of 2007.
• in the second half of 2007, 66 percent of all phishing attacks detected by Symantec were associated 
with Web sites located in the united States. two social networking sites together were the target of  
91 percent of phishing attacks with Web sites hosted in the united States. 
• the most common top-level domain used in phishing Web sites for this period was .com, accounting for 
44 percent; the second most common top-level domain used by phishing Web sites was .cn, accounting 
for 23 percent.
• Symantec observed 87,963 phishing hosts worldwide this period, an increase of 167 percent from the 
32,939 observed in the first half of the year.
• Sixty-three percent of all phishing hosts identified were in the united States, a much higher proportion 
than in any other country.
• three phishing toolkits were responsible for 26 percent of all phishing attacks observed by Symantec  
in the second half of 2007. 
Symantec internet Security threat report 
22
Global Spam Trends
• Between July 1 and December 31, 2007, spam made up 71 percent of all email traffic monitored at 
the gateway, a 16 percent increase over the last six months of 2006, when 61 percent of email was 
classified as spam.
• eighty percent of all spam detected during this period was composed in english, up from 60 percent  
in the previous reporting period.
• in the second half of 2007, 0.16 percent of all spam email contained malicious code, compared to  
0.43 percent of spam that contained malicious code in the first half of 2007. this means that one out  
of every 617 spam messages blocked by Symantec Brightmail antiSpam™ contained malicious code.
• Spam related to commercial products made up 27 percent of all spam during this period, the most of 
any category and an increase from 22 percent in the previous period.
• During the last six months of 2007, 42 percent of all spam detected worldwide originated in the united 
States, compared to 50 percent in the previous period.
• the united States hosted the most spam zombies of any country, with 10 percent of the worldwide 
total, representing no change from the first six months of 2007.
• in the second half of 2007, the daily average percentage of image spam was seven percent. this is down 
from a daily average of 27 percent during the first six months of 2007.
Symantec internet Security threat report 
23
Government Internet Security Threat Report Highlights
the following section provides a summary of the security activity that Symantec observed taking place in 
government and infrastructure sectors in the second half of 2007. this includes only highlights from the 
Government Internet Security Threat Report that are not also included in the Global Internet Security Threat 
Report highlights, listed above.
Government Attack Trends 
• telecommunications was the top critical infrastructure sector for malicious activity in the last half  
of 2007, accounting for 95 percent of the total. this is an increase from 90 percent in the first  
half of 2007.
• the top country of origin for attacks targeting the government sector was the united States, which 
accounted for 21 percent of the total. this is an increase from the first half of 2007 when the united 
States accounted for 19 percent of the total.
• Denial-of-service attacks were the most common attack type targeting government and critical 
infrastructure organizations, accounting for 46 percent of the top ten attacks. this is a decrease  
from the first half of 2007, when denial-of-service attacks accounted for 35 percent of the total  
and ranked second.
Government Phishing Trends
• the most common government tLD used in phishing Web sites for this period was gov.br, used by Web 
sites that are registered to the government of Brazil, with 19 percent of the total. 
Symantec internet Security threat report 
24
EMEA Internet Security Threat Report Highlights
the following section will offer a brief summary of the security trends that Symantec observed during the 
second half of 2007 in the emea region. this summary includes all of the metrics that are included in the 
EMEA Internet Security Threat Report. 
EMEA Attack Trends 
• Germany was the top ranked country for total malicious activity in emea, with 18 percent of the 
regional total, a slight drop from 19 percent in the previous period.
• Fifty-two percent of attacks targeting emea in the last six months of 2007 originated in the united 
States, the top ranked country, compared to 35 percent in the previous reporting period.
• During this period, the united Kingdom was the top ranked country in emea for denial-of-service 
attacks, with 32 percent of the total, down from 46 percent in the first half of the year. 
• Symantec observed an average of 25,344 active bots per day in emea for the last six months of 2007, 
an increase from the first half of the year when there were 18,616 active bots observed. 
• For the second period in a row, Germany was the top ranked country in emea for bot infections, with  
18 percent of the total, a decrease from 23 percent in the first half of 2007. 
• madrid was the top city for bot infections in emea in the second half of 2007, as it was for the previous 
two reporting periods. 
EMEA Malicious Code Trends 
• trojans were the most common type of malicious code, with 68 percent of the top 50 regional potential 
infections, the same percentage as in the first half of the year.
• the united Kingdom was the top reporting country for back doors, trojans, viruses, and worms.
• the Vundo trojan was the top malicious code sample by potential infection in emea during the current 
reporting period; it was also the top ranked sample globally.
• the top new malicious code family reported in emea this period was pidief, a trojan that exploited a 
vulnerability in pDF-reading software.
• in the last six months of 2007, 67 percent of the malicious activity observed in emea was considered a 
threat to confidential information, an increase from the 61 percent observed in the previous period.
• in the last six months of 2007 in emea, 91 percent of confidential information threats had remote 
access capabilities, compared to 87 percent in the previous six months.
Symantec internet Security threat report 
25
• During the current reporting period, the most common propagation method for malicious code was 
through email attachments, making up 37 percent of potential infections in emea, a decline from  
49 percent in the previous reporting period. 
• For the last six months of the year, five percent of the volume of the top 50 submissions in emea had 
the capability to modify Web pages content, unchanged from the first half of 2007.
EMEA Phishing and Spam Trends 
• During the last six months of 2007, romania was home to the most phishing Web sites in emea with 
46 percent of the region’s total. the most commonly spoofed brand for phishing Web sites hosted in 
romania was a social networking site. 
• in the second half of 2007, the most common top-level domain used by known phishing Web sites 
situated in the emea region was .com, which was used by 24 percent of the total.
• the highest source of spam in emea this period was the united Kingdom, with 15 percent of the 
region’s total, the same percentage and rank as the previous reporting period.
Symantec internet Security threat report 
26
APJ Internet Security Threat Report Highlights
the following section will offer a brief summary of the security activity that Symantec observed taking 
place during the first half of 2007 in the apJ region. this summary includes all of the metrics that are 
included in the APJ Internet Security Threat Report.
APJ Attack Trends 
• With 38 percent of the total, china ranked first for malicious activity within apJ for this period. in the 
first half of the year, china ranked first with 42 percent of the total. 
• china was the top source of attacks in apJ, with 32 percent of the regional total, up from 18 percent in 
the previous period.
• china was the country targeted by the most denial-of-service attacks in the apJ region, with 44 percent 
of the total, a significant decrease from 74 percent in the previous period.
• Symantec observed an average of 7,640 active bot-infected computers per day in the apJ region,  
a 52 percent decrease from the 15,447 recorded in the previous reporting period. 
• Symantec identified 901,648 distinct bot-infected computers in the apJ region, which is 18 percent of 
the 5,060,187 distinct bot-infected computers detected worldwide during this period. it is 49 percent 
less than the 1,782,416 active bot-infected computers that Symantec identified in the apJ region  
during the first half of 2007. 
• china had the most bot-infected computers in the apJ region during this period, with 43 percent of  
the total, down from 78 percent of the regional total in the first half of 2007.
• Kuala Lumpur had the most bot infections in the apJ region in the last half of 2007, a significant rise 
from seventh rank in the first half of the year. 
APJ Malicious Code Trends 
• trojans were the top type of malicious code causing potential infections in apJ, amounting to 47 percent 
of the volume of the top 50 by potential infections. 
• china was the top country for all four types of malicious code during this period.
• the top malicious code sample reported for the last six months of 2007 within the apJ region was the 
Gampass trojan.
• the most widely reported new malicious code family during this reporting period, both in apJ and 
worldwide, was the invadesys worm. 
• For the last six months of 2007, confidential information threats made up 51 percent of malicious code 
reports, a slight decrease from the 57 percent reported in the first six months of the year. 
Symantec internet Security threat report 
27
• the top propagation vector in apJ during this period was executable file sharing, which was employed 
by 55 percent of regional threats. in the first half of 2007, this vector was used by 33 percent of 
regional threats and ranked third. 
• For the last six months of 2007, 18 percent of malicious code samples originating in the apJ region  
had the ability to modify Web pages, substantially higher than the 5 percent recorded in the first  
half of 2007.
APJ Phishing and Spam Trends 
• During the last six months of 2007, china was home to the highest percentage of phishing Web sites  
in apJ, with 69 percent of the region’s total.
• the most common top-level domain used by phishing Web sites in the apJ region during this period  
was .cn, which was used by 37 percent of phishing sites in the region.
• twenty-four percent of all spam detected from the apJ region during this period originated in china,  
the most of any country in the region and the same percentage as originated there in the first half  
of the year. 
Symantec internet Security threat report 
28
Future Watch
this section of the Symantec Internet Security Threat Report Executive Summary will discuss emerging 
trends and issues that Symantec believes will become prominent over the next six to 24 months. these 
forecasts are based on emerging research that Symantec has collected during the current reporting 
period and are speculative in nature. in discussing potential future trends, Symantec hopes to provide 
organizations and end users with an opportunity to prepare themselves for rapidly evolving and complex 
security issues. this section will discuss potential security issues associated with the following:
• increasing use of whitelisting technologies 
• portable media and shrink-wrapped devices
• the decline of irc-controlled bot networks
• increase in threats attempting to influence u.S. election results 
Increasing use of whitelisting technologies
For the past few years, Symantec has observed a significant increase in the number of new malicious 
code threats targeting users and computer systems. as of the end of 2007, the number of malicious code 
threats that Symantec had identified stood at 1,122,311. Of this total, 711,912 threats were identified in 
2007 alone, a 468 percent increase over the 125,243 threats identified in 2006. When adware, spyware 
and misleading applications are included, Symantec speculates that the ratio of non-malicious software to 
malicious software being distributed may be reaching a tipping point.
to combat malicious threats, security technologies have traditionally relied on blacklisting, a technique 
that removes, blocks, or quarantines malicious code or unwanted applications based on a list of known 
characteristics. this approach has proven to be successful, as the number of malicious, or unwanted, 
software programs has traditionally been lower than the number of non-malicious, or desired, software 
programs. But using new sensor technology deployed by Symantec that measures the prevalence of 
different software applications around the world, the initial results indicate that the release rate of 
malicious code and other unwanted programs may be exceeding that of legitimate software applications.
For example, Symantec measured the adoption rate of applications and found that out of 54,609 unique 
applications deployed on microsoft Windows pcs, 65 percent were malicious. Furthermore, Symantec 
observed that while legitimate applications were distributed to thousands of users, the majority of unique 
malicious code applications had been distributed to five users or less, indicating that malicious code and 
other unwanted programs continue to be targeted in nature. 
While these results are preliminary, Symantec speculates that levels of malicious code and unwanted 
programs will continue to rise and exceed the quantity of legitimate software released and that, rather 
than relying on just the traditional blacklisting approach of identifying bad applications, security 
techniques will need to focus on whitelisting known or certified “good” applications. Security technologies 
will likely need to adopt this model in order to economically and effectively write signatures for a smaller 
set of legitimate programs, which will allow security vendors to provide consumers and enterprises with 
adaptive solutions that reflect changes in the threat landscape.
Symantec internet Security threat report 
29
Symantec internet Security threat report 
30
Portable media and other small storage devices
portable media such as uSB flash thumb drives, portable audio and video players, and other small storage 
devices such as digital picture frames have experienced a rapid growth in availability, distribution and 
storage capabilities.39 not unlike earlier portable storage methods, such as the 3.5 inch floppy disk, 
today’s mobile storage options represent a serious security concern, not only as an attack target, but also 
in their ability to act as a distribution system for malicious code, such as viruses, worms and trojans. With 
some of these devices having internet connectivity, Symantec speculates that, as these devices continue 
to increase in popularity, attackers and malicious code authors will target these devices more frequently, 
even during the manufacturing process.
increasingly, multi-function devices such as cellular telephones and audio players contain flash drives  
and small, high-storage hard drives that enable the easy portability of large amounts of data. the result  
is an expansion of the network endpoint, since unauthorized devices can be connected to enterprise 
systems and authorized devices can be connected to unauthorized systems and networks. this has 
resulted in an increased attack surface and a higher number of potentially viable entry points for  
malicious code and attacks. 
a recent survey has suggested that over 43 percent of enterprises have little or no measures in place  
to address permissions or restrictions on removable media within their networks. moreover, less than 
17 percent use endpoint security measures to address the issue.40 With increases in data theft and data 
leakage, these devices represent a viable attack vector for attackers as they attempt to steal as much 
information from as many sources as possible. 
While the risks associated with internet-connected devices are well documented, the risks of malicious 
code being introduced during the manufacturing process of these devices are not. Symantec is concerned 
that attackers could introduce malicious code at one or more points during their manufacture and 
distribution. media players, cellular phones, and other digital devices with storage mediums may have 
various components created by different manufacturers before final assembly and shipping. the longer 
the manufacturing supply chain during this process, the greater the opportunity for malicious code to be  
embedded in the devices directly. in some instances, the transfer of malicious code to storage media 
could accidentally occur from an infected pc at a manufacturing facility. it is also possible that attackers 
could deliberately target machines at a manufacturing facility to enhance the chances that, once final 
assembly and delivery is completed, their malicious code will be delivered to the end user out-of-the-
box. a recent example is a number of digital picture frames that were found to contain an older trojan 
program and distributed by a major u.S.-based retailer.41 in another case, some units of a media player 
manufactured in china and imported by a Dutch company were found to have the Fujacks42 worm.43 
 39 http://www.us-tech.com/relid/669342/iSvars/default/new_production_technologies_fo.htm
 40 http://www.secprodonline.com/articles/47976/
 41 http://www.securityfocus.com/news/11499/1
 42 http://www.symantec.com/security_response/writeup.jsp?docid=2007-010509-0134-99
 43 http://www.pcworld.idg.com.au/index.php/id;527648929
Symantec internet Security threat report 
31
The decline of IRC-controlled bot networks
For the past several years, Symantec has reported on the number of bot-infected computers controlled via 
command-and-control servers through internet relay chat (irc). Over the past several reporting periods, 
Symantec has observed a steady decrease in the number of command-and-control servers using the 
irc protocol, while the numbers of bot-infected computers has remained relatively steady. although the 
decline in irc bot networks (botnets)44 has been expected for some time, it has only begun to manifest 
itself relatively recently through better detection solutions and methods. as a result, Symantec speculates 
that attackers are accelerating their shift away from irc control channels to newer, stealthier control 
methods, using protocols such as Http and peer-to-peer (p2p). 
traditional irc-controlled botnets rely on a client-server model of control, where commands to individual 
bot-infected computers are relayed through a central server controlled by an attacker or group of 
attackers. By employing irc for this traffic, iSps and security organizations are more readily able to 
identify patterns in the traffic to allow for their identification and, once identified, the command-and-
control servers can be shut down, effectively disabling the botnet. this has resulted in a significant 
drop in identified irc command-and-control servers over the past two reporting periods.45 as a result, 
threats such as the peacomm (Storm worm),46 along with the recent mega-D47 and mayDay48 examples, 
are becoming increasingly popular threats that represent advancements in botnet organization and 
implementation. 
peacomm and mega-D are botnet threats that use p2p networks in order to communicate. unlike irc-
controlled botnets, the hosts in a p2p botnet get their instructions from other hosts in the same network; 
essentially creating a headless botnet whereby shutting down one host will not result in the collapse of 
the network itself. to reduce the likelihood of detection, these threats employ encrypted communications 
between the hosts, increasing the difficulty of differentiating between legitimate and malicious traffic. as 
bots become more difficult to detect due to encryption, attackers are likely to increase their use of botnets 
for launching internet attacks, distributing malicious code, transferring stolen confidential information,  
and conducting other criminal transactions.
mayDay extends this concept by using several different communications channels, including Web browser 
proxy settings and the internet control message protocol (icmp), along with p2p. its ability to use secure 
Web browser proxies to bypass security controls in enterprise environments makes mayDay potentially 
more dangerous than many other potential threats. although most of these threats are currently used 
to distribute spam, their botnet capabilities could also allow them to distribute malicious code, steal 
confidential information and launch attacks on other systems.
Symantec speculates that more advanced botnet threats will begin to emerge that employ stealth 
methods such as steganography.49 in bot communications, steganography would allow bot masters50 to 
place command instructions in public forums, and even go so far as to direct bots to use search engines 
in order to search for particular embedded words or symbols hidden in forums, which could then lead to 
specifically crafted Web sites that relay further instructions. in combination with other communication 
methods, such as using DnS queries and rep