A Sample ACM SIGKDD Explorations article in LaTeX
Ben Trovato
Institute for Clarity in
Documentation
1932 Wallamaloo Lane
Wallamaloo, New Zealand
trovato@corporation.com
G.K.M. Tobin
Institute for Clarity in
Documentation
P.O. Box 1212
Dublin, Ohio 43017-6221
webmaster@marysville-
ohio.com
Lars Thørväld
∗
The Thørväld Group
1 Thørväld Circle
Hekla, Iceland
larst@affiliation.org
ABSTRACT
This paper provides a sample of a LaTeX document for final
submission to Sigkdd Explorations, the official newsletter
of ACM Sigkdd. This is a modified version of the ACM
Proceedings sample file.
The developers have tried to include every imaginable sort
of “bells and whistles”, such as a subtitle, footnotes on title,
subtitle and authors, as well as in the text, and every op-
tional component (e.g. Acknowledgements, Additional Au-
thors, Appendices), not to mention examples of equations,
theorems, tables and figures.
To make best use of this sample document, run it through
LATEX and BibTeX, and compare this source code with the
printed output produced by the dvi file.
1. INTRODUCTION
The proceedings are the records of a conference. ACM seeks
to give these conference by-products a uniform, high-quality
appearance. To do this, ACM has some rigid requirements
for the format of the proceedings documents: there is a spec-
ified format (balanced double columns), a specified set of
fonts (Arial or Helvetica and Times Roman) in certain spec-
ified sizes (for instance, 9 point for body copy), a specified
live area (18 × 23.5 cm [7” × 9.25”]) centered on the page,
specified size of margins (2.54cm [1”] top and bottom and
1.9cm [.75”] left and right; specified column width (8.45cm
[3.33”]) and gutter size (.083cm [.33”]).
The good news is, with only a handful of manual settings1,
the LATEX document class file handles all of this for you.
The remainder of this document is concerned with showing,
in the context of an “actual” document, the LATEX com-
mands specifically available for denoting the structure of a
proceedings paper, rather than with giving rigorous descrip-
tions or explanations of such commands.
2. THE BODY OF THE PAPER
∗This author is the one who did all the really hard work.
1Two of these, the \numberofauthors and \alignauthor
commands, you have already used; another,
\balancecolumns, will be used in your very last run
of LATEX to ensure balanced column heights on the last
page.
Typically, the body of a paper is organized into a hierar-
chical structure, with numbered or unnumbered headings
for sections, subsections, sub-subsections, and even smaller
sections. The command \section that precedes this para-
graph is part of such a hierarchy.2 LATEX handles the num-
bering and placement of these headings for you, when you
use the appropriate heading commands around the titles of
the headings. If you want a sub-subsection or smaller part
to be unnumbered in your output, simply append an aster-
isk to the command name. Examples of both numbered and
unnumbered headings will appear throughout the balance of
this sample document.
Because the entire article is contained in the document
environment, you can indicate the start of a new paragraph
with a blank line in your input file; that is why this sentence
forms a separate paragraph.
2.1 Type Changes and Special Characters
We have already seen several typeface changes in this sam-
ple. You can indicate italicized words or phrases in your
text with the command \textit; emboldening with the com-
mand \textbf and typewriter-style (for instance, for com-
puter code) with \texttt. But remember, you do not have
to indicate typestyle changes when such changes are part
of the structural elements of your article; for instance, the
heading of this subsection will be in a sans serif3 typeface,
but that is handled by the document class file. Take care
with the use of4 the curly braces in typeface changes; they
mark the beginning and end of the text that is to be in the
different typeface.
You can use whatever symbols, accented characters, or non-
English characters you need anywhere in your document;
you can find a complete list of what is available in the LATEX
User’s Guide[?].
2.2 Math Equations
You may want to display math equations in three distinct
styles: inline, numbered or non-numbered display. Each of
the three are discussed in the next sections.
2This is the second footnote. It starts a series of three foot-
notes that add nothing informational, but just give an idea
of how footnotes work and look. It is a wordy one, just so
you see how a longish one plays out.
3A third footnote, here. Let’s make this a rather short one
to see how it looks.
4A fourth, and last, footnote.
2.2.1 Inline (In-text) Equations
A formula that appears in the running text is called an inline
or in-text formula. It is produced by the math environment,
which can be invoked with the usual \begin. . .\end
construction or with the short form $. . .$. You can use
any of the symbols and structures, from α to ω, available
in LATEX[?]; this section will simply show a few examples
of in-text equations in context. Notice how this equation:
limn→∞ x = 0, set here in in-line math style, looks slightly
different when set in display style. (See next section).
2.2.2 Display Equations
A numbered display equation – one set off by vertical space
from the text and centered horizontally – is produced by the
equation environment. An unnumbered display equation is
produced by the displaymath environment.
Again, in either environment, you can use any of the symbols
and structures available in LATEX; this section will just give
a couple of examples of display equations in context. First,
consider the equation, shown as an inline equation above:
lim
n→∞
x = 0 (1)
Notice how it is formatted somewhat differently in the dis-
playmath environment. Now, we’ll enter an unnumbered
equation:
∞∑
i=0
x + 1
and follow it with another numbered equation:
∞∑
i=0
xi =
∫ π+2
0
f (2)
just to demonstrate LATEX’s able handling of numbering.
2.3 Citations
Citations to articles [?; ?; ?; ?], conference proceedings [?]
or books [?; ?] listed in the Bibliography section of your
article will occur throughout the text of your article. You
should use BibTeX to automatically produce this bibliogra-
phy; you simply need to insert one of several citation com-
mands with a key of the item cited in the proper location in
the .tex file [?]. The key is a short reference you invent to
uniquely identify each work; in this sample document, the
key is the first author’s surname and a word from the title.
This identifying key is included with each item in the .bib
file for your article.
The details of the construction of the .bib file are beyond
the scope of this sample document, but more information
can be found in the Author’s Guide, and exhaustive details
in the LATEX User’s Guide[?].
So far, this article has shown only the plainest form of the
citation command, using \cite.
2.4 Tables
Because tables cannot be split across pages, the best place-
ment for them is typically the top of the page nearest their
initial cite. To ensure this proper “floating” placement of
tables, use the environment table to enclose the table’s con-
tents and the table caption. The contents of the table itself
must go in the tabular environment, to be aligned properly
Table 1: Frequency of Special Characters
Non-English or Math Frequency Comments
Ø 1 in 1,000 For Swedish names
π 1 in 5 Common in math
$ 4 in 5 Used in business
Ψ21 1 in 40,000 Unexplained usage
in rows and columns, with the desired horizontal and verti-
cal rules. Again, detailed instructions on tabular material
is found in the LATEX User’s Guide.
Immediately following this sentence is the point at which
Table 1 is included in the input file; compare the placement
of the table here with the table in the printed dvi output of
this document.
To set a wider table, which takes up the whole width of
the page’s live area, use the environment table* to en-
close the table’s contents and the table caption. As with
a single-column table, this wide table will ”float” to a lo-