Gaussian Process Subset Scanning for Anomalous Pattern Detection
in Non-iid Data
William Herlands Edward McFowland III Andrew G. Wilson Daniel B. Neill
Carnegie Mellon University University of Minnesota Cornell University Carnegie Mellon University
Abstract
Identifying anomalous patterns in real-world
data is essential for understanding where,
when, and how systems deviate from their
expected dynamics. Yet methods that sepa-
rately consider the anomalousness of each in-
dividual data point have low detection power
for subtle, emerging irregularities. Addi-
tionally, recent detection techniques based
on subset scanning make strong indepen-
dence assumptions and suffer degraded per-
formance in correlated data. We introduce
methods for identifying anomalous patterns
in non-iid data by combining Gaussian pro-
cesses with novel log-likelihood ratio statis-
tic and subset scanning techniques. Our ap-
proaches are powerful, interpretable, and can
integrate information across multiple data
streams. We illustrate their performance on
numeric simulations and three open source
spatiotemporal datasets of opioid overdose
deaths, 311 calls, and storm reports.
1 Introduction
Anomalous pattern detection is the task of identifying
subsets of data points that systematically differ from
the underlying model. Identifying anomalous patterns
in real-world data is critical for understanding how
people and systems deviate from expected behavior.
In the spatiotemporal domain, timely identification
of such patterns can allow for effective interventions.
For example, detecting anomalous increases in opioid
deaths can enable health care workers to effectively
target overdose prevention programs. Similarly, pat-
terns of increased 311 calls can help cities to better
target services and allocate resources.
Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Ar-
tificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS) 2018, Lan-
zarote, Spain. PMLR: Volume 84. Copyright 2018 by the
author(s).
To detect these anomalous patterns, we will address
three key challenges. First, real-world data is ex-
tremely complex with non-trivial correlations across
space, time, and other features. Treating data points
as iid ignores important covariance structure and will
substantially overestimate the anomalousness of de-
tected patterns. Second, an event of interest often af-
fects multiple nearby points. Simply considering how
anomalous is each individual point loses power to de-
tect subtle anomalies. Third, anomalous patterns are
often irregularly shaped or discontiguous due to la-
tent demographic or geographic features. Searching
for these complex patterns is important for precision
and detection power, yet exhaustive methods are com-
putationally intractable and may result in overfitting.
A sensible approach to this problem is model-based
anomaly detection, where a distribution is fit to model
“regular” data. Points with a low likelihood under
this distribution are identified as anomalous (Chan-
dola et al., 2009; Hodge and Austin, 2004). To ad-
dress the complex correlations in real-world systems,
Gaussian processes (GPs) provide a natural means of
learning covariance structure from data. However, GP
anomaly detection has been typically used to clas-
sify individual points as outliers (Smith et al., 2014;
Kowalska and Peel, 2012; Stegle et al., 2008). Such
approaches have difficulty when confronted with sub-
tle anomalies, where each individual data point may
seem to conform to the underlying distribution, yet
when taken as a group, they form a collectively anoma-
lous pattern. Thus anomalous pattern detection is a
conceptually and statistically different problem than
anomaly or outlier detection.
A few recent GP models consider anomalous inter-
vals (Reece et al., 2015) and sophisticated change
points (Saatçi et al., 2010; Herlands et al., 2016) to
detect intervals of anomalous points. However, these
methods (the first two of which are applied exclusively
to one-dimensional data) are limited to contiguous in-
tervals in the input domain and cannot model the ir-
regularly shaped anomalies we expect in complex data.
Cheng et al. (2015) recently developed an anomalous
ar
X
iv
:1
80
4.
01
46
6v
1 
 [
st
at
.M
L
] 
 4
 A
pr
 2
01
8
Gaussian Process Subset Scanning for Anomalous Pattern Detection in Non-iid Data
pattern detection technique for spatiotemporal data.
However, this approach requires a corpus of anomaly-
free training data, can only detect contiguous anoma-
lous patterns, and is specific to video data.
In the statistics literature, spatial and subset scan-
ning methods are commonly used to identify collec-
tively anomalous subsets of data (Kulldorff, 1997;
Neill, 2012). By combining information across a sub-
set of data elements, they generate a strong signal of
anomalous behavior. These approaches compute a log-
likelihood ratio (LLR) of subsets being drawn from a
null or anomalous distribution. The LLR is a power-
ful statistic that measures how much evidence exists
in the data to conclude if the subset exhibits abnor-
mal behavior (Kulldorff, 1997; Neill et al., 2005). A
core challenge of subset scanning is searching through
the O(2n) possible subsets of n data elements (Neill
and Moore, 2004; Agarwal et al., 2006; Duczmal et al.,
2007; Wu et al., 2009). Neill (2012) shows that certain
LLR statistics satisfying a linear-time subset scanning
(LTSS) property can be optimized in O(n log n) by or-
dering points according to a particular “priority func-
tion” and evaluating only n of the 2n subsets. How-
ever, LTSS assumes that we can compute the contribu-
tions of individual points to the LLR. This is possible
only when assuming that data is uncorrelated under
the null (Neill, 2009), yet when applied to non-iid data
this independence assumption would result in substan-
tial false positive rates, as correlated fluctuations will
be mistaken for anomalous movements.
1.1 Contributions
In this paper we introduce novel techniques for identi-
fying anomalous patterns in non-iid data. Our meth-
ods are powerful and interpretable. By combining nat-
urally interpretable GPs with localized anomalous pat-
terns we can describe the “regular” data dynamics as
well as quantify and corroborate anomalous regions
with domain experts. Our main contributions are:
1. Combining GP modeling with subset scanning for
powerful and interpretable detection of anomalous
patterns in highly correlated data.
2. Proposing a new likelihood ratio statistic and sub-
set scan technique for correlated data that do not
assume conditional independence.
3. Performing hold-out GP inference while comput-
ing our new likelihood ratio statistic conditioned
on GP hyperparameters, to avoid corrupting the
null model with anomalies.
4. Developing two novel, principled approaches
to the NP-hard problem of searching for the
most anomalous subset, through a new iterative
method and an application of the Generalized
Rayleigh Quotient respectively.
5. We demonstrate our methods on numeric simula-
tions, opioid-related deaths, 311 calls for service
data, and multiple streams of sewer flooding re-
ports and tree damage reports, illustrating inter-
pretable and policy-relevant results.
The paper proceeds as follows: §2 provides background
on GPs. §3 introduces a novel log-likelihood ratio
statistic for non-iid data. §4 details the Gaussian Pro-
cess Neighborhood Scan (GPNS) and the Gaussian
Process Subset Scan (GPSS). Experimental results on
numerical and real data are presented in §5.
2 Gaussian Processes
Consider data, (x, y), where x = {x1, . . . , xn}, xi ∈
RD, are inputs or covariates, and y = {y1, . . . , yn},
yi ∈ R are outputs or response variables indexed by
x. We assume that y is generated from x by a latent
function with a GP prior. In particular, y = f(x) + ,
f(x) ∼ GP(m(x), k(x, x′))
A GP is a nonparametric prior over functions com-
pletely specified by mean and covariance functions.
The mean function, m(x) = E[f(x)], is the prior ex-
pectation of f(x). The covariance function is given by
k(x, x′) = cov(f(x), f(x′)) (Rasmussen, 2006).
In this paper we use three important properties of GPs.
First, we can draw samples from a GP prior since con-
ditional on GP hyperparameters any finite collection
of function values is distributed N (m(x), k(x, x))
Second, if a function has a Gaussian noise model,
 ∼ N (0, σ2 ), then conditional on hyperparameters
and data (x, y), we can derive a closed form expres-
sion for the predictive distribution of f(x∗),
f(x∗)|x, y, x∗ ∼ N
(
k(x∗, x)[k(x, x) + σ2 I]
−1y,
k(x∗, x∗)− k(x∗, x)[k(x, x) + σ2 I]−1k(x, x∗)
) (1)
Third, GP hyperparameters, θ, can be learned by max-
imum likelihood optimization. While naively this re-
quires O(n3) computations, we use scalable GP learn-
ing in the structured kernel inference (SKI) frame-
work (Wilson and Nickisch, 2015) for O(n) scalability.
3 LLR statistic for non-iid data
Considering (x, y) as defined in §2, we are interested in
anomalous patterns that systematically differ from the
William Herlands, Edward McFowland III, Andrew G. Wilson, Daniel B. Neill
underlying data distribution. We frame this search as
an LLR comparison between a null model of “regular”
behavior and an alternative model of “anomalous” be-
havior. A single latent GP defines both models. Sub-
sets of data with the highest LLR scores are identified
as the most anomalous.
Using a GP as the foundational modeling technique
enables us to learn complex covariance structure and
seamlessly extend to high dimensions as well as missing
data. GPs are also naturally interpretable, which can
provide insight about the “regular” data dynamics.
Consider a given subset of data points defined by the
binary weighting vector w, where wi = 1 if (xi, yi) is
included in the subset and wi = 0 if excluded. Our
null model, H0, assumes that all points (regardless of
wi) are drawn from a function with a GP prior: y =
f(x)+, where f(x) ∼ GP (θ0) and  ∼ N (0, σ2 I). Our
alternative model, H1(w), assumes that yi = f(xi) + 
for wi = 0, and yi = g(f(xi), θ1) +  for wi = 1, where
g(·) is any function of the latent GP.
Here we focus on the case of a mean shift, g(f(x), θ1) =
f(x)+β, β ∈ R1. The covariance structure remains the
same in the null and alternative models. This allows
us to efficiently compute the posterior mean vector µ
and covariance matrix Σ through GP inference, where
y ∼ N (µ,Σ) under H0, and y ∼ N (µ + βw,Σ) under
H1(w). For posterior µ and Σ we condition on all
data outside the subset of points represented by w,
ensuring that null model estimates are not corrupted
by anomalous observations. However, since anomalies
are assumed to be rare, their influence on parameter
estimation is minimal. Therefore we use all (x, y) for
GP learning of the parameters of the null model θ0.
We concentrate on mean changes since many real
world cases concern anomalous levels of a quantity.
Increases in localized drug overdoses, crime, and calls
for city service are all mean shifts of great importance.
Methods for identifying arbitrary changes in distribu-
tion – while able to detect other sorts of patterns –
have reduced power to detect such mean shifts, due
to more diffuse inductive biases. Persistent changes in
covariance structure are typically considered change-
points and require substantial data in both regimes as
opposed to the localized anomalous patterns we detect.
To measure how anomalous is a subset defined by
w, we compute the generalized log-likelihood ratio,
LLR(w) = maxβ LLR(w | β), where:
LLR(w | β) = log MNPDF(y − βw | µ,Σ)
MNPDF(y | µ,Σ) (2)
Here MNPDF is the multivariate normal probability
density function. The most anomalous subset, w∗, is
w∗ = argmax
w
LLR(w)
= argmax
w
max
β
−β
2
2
wTEw + βwTE(y − µ)
(3)
where E = Σ−1 for notational brevity. Con-
ditional on w, the MLE β∗ = arg maxβ LLR(w)
can be calculated in closed form, β∗ = [wTE(y −
µ)]/[wTEw] (see Appendix A). Nevertheless, maxi-
mizing LLR(w) is an NP-complete Integer Quadratic
Program (Del Pia et al., 2014), so an optimal solution
requires exponential-time computation. Note that the
LTSS condition for a log linear-time subset search de-
scribed in Neill (2012) does not apply, since it requires
independent data with a diagonal covariance matrix.
3.1 Randomization testing
Given a method for finding anomalous subsets, the fol-
lowing randomization testing procedure determines an
α-level significance threshold for LLR(w) conditional
on the parameters of the null model:
1. Repeatedly draw y(r) ∼ GP (θ0), at the same co-
variates, x, as the real data for r = 1...R.
2. Scan over (x, y(r)) with the chosen subset search-
ing method. For each randomization r save the
most anomalous LLR value, LLR(w∗,(r)).
3. Determine an α-level threshold for significance
based on the (1− α) quantile of the R maximum
LLR values, above which any LLR(w) from the
original scan is considered statistically significant.
4 Efficient subset scanning
Having defined the LLR scan statistic to evaluate how
anomalous is a given subset, we must now decide over
which subsets to scan. Unconstrained optimization
over O(2n) subsets is computationally infeasible for
an exhaustive search. Additionally, an unconstrained
search may return an unrelated set of points, reducing
interpretability and increasing the potential for over-
fitting. Anomalous events in human data, such as drug
usage and requests for government services, often af-
fect multiple nearby points. Thus we assume that
anomalous points are near one another. For exam-
ple, in spatiotemporal data we assume that anomalous
points are clustered in space and time. Following Neill
(2012), we define the local “k-neighborhood” of each
data point, consisting of that point and its k−1 nearest
neighbors, for some k. We propose two approaches for
using these neighborhoods to identify anomalous pat-
terns: Gaussian Process Neighborhood Scan (GPNS)
and Gaussian Process Subset Scan (GPSS).
Gaussian Process Subset Scanning for Anomalous Pattern Detection in Non-iid Data
4.1 GP Neighborhood Scan (GPNS)
Given a maximum neighborhood size kmax, GPNS
searches over the O(nkmax) local neighborhoods con-
sisting of the k-neighborhood for each point where k =
{1, 2, . . . , kmax}. Where neighborhoods are defined by
Euclidean distance, the set of search regions are cir-
cular in shape. For each neighborhood, (x(n), y(n)),
we obtain posterior µ and Σ conditional on θ0 and
points (x(−n), y(−n)). We then compute LLR(w) for
the neighborhood where w = ~1, i.e., we evaluate the al-
ternative hypothesis of the entire neighborhood being
anomalous. GPNS pseudocode is presented in Alg. 1.
Algorithm 1: GPNS
for k = 1 : kmax do
for (xi, yi), i = 1 : n do
Define k-neighborhood, n(k,i), and infer (µ,Σ);
Set w(k,i) = ~1 ∈ {0, 1}k;
Compute β∗ given w(k,i);
Compute LLR(w(k,i));
end
end
Choose n∗ = argmaxn(k,i) LLRn(k,i) ;
Randomization testing for significance;
4.2 GP Subset Scan (GPSS)
While GPNS simplifies the exponential search, it re-
quires constraining assumptions about the shape of
neighborhoods and is only able to discover contigu-
ous, spherical anomalous patterns. While there are
approaches to increase the variety of neighborhood
shapes without substantially degrading computational
efficiency (Kulldorff et al., 2006; Neill and Moore, 2004;
Kulldorff, 2001), these methods still require strict
specification of potential anomalies. Such foreknowl-
edge is unrealistic in real-world applications where
natural boundaries, demographics, and stochastic ef-
fects lead to irregularly-shaped patterns. In such cases
GPNS has reduced detection and explanatory power.
To flexibly detect irregularly-shaped patterns, GPSS
conducts an unconstrained search for the most
anomalous subset within neighborhoods of fixed size
k. Specifically, we identify the subset of points
(x(s), y(s)) ⊆ (x(n), y(n)) that maximize the LLR
within each neighborhood. This allows us to iden-
tify highly irregular and even non-contiguous anoma-
lous patterns. By restricting the search within a local
neighborhood, we ensure that the identified patterns
are coherent and interpretable. GPSS requires evalu-
ating O(n) neighborhoods, as presented in Alg. 2.
Algorithm 2: GPSS
Fix k at some size;
for (xi, yi), i = 1 : n do
Define k-neighborhood, n(i), and infer (µ,Σ);
Approximate the optimal subset, s(i) ⊆ n(i);
Set each w
(i)
j = 1(j ∈ s(i));
Compute β∗ given w(i);
Compute LLR(w(i));
end
Choose s∗ = argmaxs(i) LLRs(i) ;
Randomization testing for significance;
Unfortunately, this procedure requires finding w ∈
{0, 1}k that maximizes the LLR of a subset within the
neighborhood, argmaxw -
1
2w
TβEwβ + wTβE(y(n)-µ).
This is still an Integer Quadratic Program, whose op-
timal solution is intractable even for moderately sized
neighborhoods. Instead, below we formulate three ap-
proaches for finding approximate solutions.
4.2.1 βMAX for conditionally optimal subset
Due to the full rank covariance matrix, we are unable
to disentangle the individual contributions from each
point to the LLR. However, if we condition on some
subset of points, w, we are able to compute the con-
ditional contribution of each point. First, note that
conditional on w we can decompose w∗ from Eq. 3 into
a sum over each of the m points in the neighborhood
wTβE(y(n) − µ)− 1
2
wTβEwβ
=
∑
i
wi
[
β
(
E(y(n) − µ)
)
i
− 1
2
(∑
j 6=i
wjEj,i + Ei,i
)
β2
]
(4)
The contribution of point (xi, yi) to the LLR is the
difference in LLR between wi = 0 and wi = 1. Due to
the outer and inner sums, the change in the LLR is:
β
(
E(y(n) − µ)
)
i
− 1
2
(∑
j 6=i
2wjEj,i + Ei,i
)
β2 (5)
To maximize the LLR a point is only added to the
subset if its contribution is positive. By setting Eq. 5
to zero we can compute βMAXi , the maximum β value
for which to include point (xi, yi).
βMAXi =
[
2
(
E(y(n)-µ)
)
i
]
/
[∑
j 6=i
2wjEj,i + Ei,i
]
(6)
As proved in Speakman et al. (2016), we obtain the
conditional optimal subset by using βMAX as a prior-
ity function, ranking each data point by βMAXi , and
William Herlands, Edward McFowland III, Andrew G. Wilson, Daniel B. Neill
iteratively compute the score function for subsets in-
cluding each additional point. This yields a log linear
search over data points. Such an approach identifies
the most anomalous subset with a positive mean shift.
To find the most anomalous subset with a negative
mean shift we simply rank data points by −βMAXi
Since the derivation of βMAX is conditional on a subset
w, we obtain the conditional optimal subset. In order
to approximate an optimal solution we iteratively com-
pute the conditional optimal subset beginning with a
null subset, w = ~0. This requires O(`k log(k)) compu-
tation for some ` number of iterations. Pseudo-code
for this algorithm can be found in Appendix B.
For a diagonal Σ, βMAX orders points according to
2(y
(n)
i − µi), which is equivalent to the LTSS pri-
ority function for an independent Gaussian subset
scan (Speakman et al., 2016). Thus βMAX approach
identifies the optimal subset in the independent case
and is conditionally optimal in the dependent case.
4.2.2 Generalized Rayleigh Quotient method
We consider an alternative optimization approach to
obtain an approximately optimal subset. Consider
plugging the MLE solution, β∗, into w∗ from Eq. 3,
w∗ = argmax
w
[
wT
(
E(y(n)-µ)(y(n)-µ)TE
)
w
]
/[
wT
(
2E
)
w
] (7)
If we relax w such that w ∈ Rm, this can
be re-written as the generalized Rayleigh quotient,
(wTAw)/(wTBw), where A = E(y(n) − µ)(y(n) −
µ)TE, and B = 2E. Note that A is a sym-
metric matrix and B is a Hermitian positive-
definite matrix. Taking the Cholesky decomposi-
tion B = LLT , the generalized Rayleigh quotient
can be written as a Rayleigh quotient (Yu et al.,
2013), R(A′, w′) = (w′TA′w′)/(w′Tw′), where A′ =
L−1ALT
−1
and w′ = LTw. The maximum w′ of
the Rayleigh quotient, w′max = argmaxw′ R(A
′, w′) =
argmaxw′(w
′TAw′)/(w′Tw′) = v(max), is the largest
eigenvector of A′. Since we defined w′ = LTw, then
the maximum wmax = L
T−1v(max) is the relaxed solu-
tion to our original optimization problem from Eq. 7.
Although wmax has non-integer elements, the order-
ing of the elements of this eigenvector corresponds to
the importance of the data points in the neighborhood.
Thus we scan over the ordered elements of wmax, itera-
tively adding each to the subset. Maximizing LLR(w)
over this linear number of subsets provides an approx-
imate solution to the constrained integer program.
4.2.3 Forward stepwise optimization
A third approximation approach uses a greedy forward
stepwise algorithm that iteratively sets one element
wi = 1 such that the objective is minimized in each
iteration. Once the objective cannot be further mini-
mized the optimization is terminated, thereby provid-
ing a greedy optimal solution. For a neighborhood of
size k, the stepwise approach may require up to k it-
erations, evaluating O(k) subsets at each iteration for
a total of O(k2) computations.
4.3 Efficient Multi-Stream Search
Often we are interested in searching for anomalous
patterns across multiple dimensions, or streams, of
data. For example, anomalous patterns of damaged
trees and sewer flooding can help localize severe storm
damage. Multi-stream search can enhance the signal
of subtle anomalies that affect multiple streams, and
reduce false positive detections when perturbations in
a single stream are not important to the application.
In principle, GPNS and GPSS can handle multiple
streams by stacking the data from each stream and
adding a final dimension to indicate from which stream
the data came. Yet naive GP inference requires O(n3)
complexity, so repeatedly concatenating data from
multiple streams quickly leads to scalability issues. On
the other hand, Kronecker-based scalability require a
kernel that is multiplicatively decomposable over the
input dimensions (Saatçi, 2012). This implies that the
prior correlation structure is the same over all data
dimensions except for the stream indicator. For ex-
ample, Kronecker structure in spatiotemporal settings
constrains streams to have the same prior spatiotem-
poral correlations. This assumption is overly restric-
tive for the complex data in which we are interested.
Instead, we learn independent GPs for each stream of
data and then scan over neighborhoods in the data
jointly for all streams. Posteriors for each stream are
independently inferred from the associated GP. Thus
for streams s = 1, ..., S, the posterior distribution for
subset scanning contains a block diagonal covariance,
N

µ1...
µS
 ,
Σ1 0 00 . . . 0
0 0 ΣS


In this manner each stream can flexibly learn different
prior covariance structures while still ensuring scalabil-
ity equivalent to single-stream GPNS and GPSS. The
one drawback of this approach is that inter-stream co-
variance information is not exploited for GP inference.
Gaussian Process Subset Scanning for Anomalous Pattern Detection in Non-iid Data
5 Experiments
We evaluate GPNS and GPSS using numeric simula-
tions and three urban spatiotemporal datasets. We
compare the methods against a number of competi-
tive baseline algorithms from contemporary literature.
First, we compare to an independent Gaussian sub-
set scan, a state of the art anomalous pattern detec-
tion algorithm (Neill, 2009, 2012). Additionally, we
compare against a standard GP anomaly detection ap-
proach (Kowalska and Peel, 2012; Stegle et al., 2008),
in which we use the posterior distribution of the null
GP model θ0 regressed over the entire dataset to clas-
sify points beyond a given level-α significance thresh-
old as anomalies. While all GP methods in this paper
are agnostic to kernel choice, an RBF kernel and linear
mean function were used for all experiments.
Although anomalous pattern detection is a distinct
problem from outlier or anomalous point detection, we
also compare against two commonly used outlier de-
tection techniques: a one-class SVM (Schölkopf et al.,
2001) and robust multivariate outlier detection us-
ing the Mahalanobis distance (Rousseeuw and Leroy,
2005; Rousseeuw and Van Zomeren, 1990).
An additional real data analysis is in Appendix D.
5.1 Numeric experiments
For each numeric test, baseline data is drawn from a
2D GP (Rasmussen and Nickisch, 2016). Multiplica-
tive anomalies of arbitrary shape are injected by scal-
ing randomly sampled points, within a randomly cho-
sen neighborhood, by a factor of ≥ 1. (Note that this
simulation does not correspond to our method’s as-
sumption of an additive mean shift.) The most anoma-
lous subset is computed using GPSS methods and
baseline approaches. For the baseline GP approach
and one-class SVM we provide additional information
(the true percentage of the anomalous data) in order
to determine their threshold levels.
1 1.5 2
Magnitude of anomaly
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
%
 c
as
es
 re
je
ct
ed
 n
ul
l
Power at ,=0.05
1 1.5 2
Magnitude of anomaly
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Pr
ec
is
io
n
Precision
1 1.5 2
Magnitude of anomaly
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
R
ec
al
l
Recall
beta-MAX
GRQ
stepwise
baseline indep SS
baseline GP
baseline SVM
baseline RobustCov
Figure 1: Precision, recall, and power at α = 0.05
for GPSS methods and baseline anomaly detection ap-
proaches. The three GPSS methods dominate in all
cases with the βMAX performing best overall.
Varying the multiplicative factor between 1 and 2 we
compute the average precision and recall in Fig. 1 over
50 tests in a 400 point grid for each multiplicative fac-
tor. Randomization testing (α = .05) is performed for
each synthetic test to determine the score threshold for
significance. For precision and recall, truly anomalous
points are “positive” and all other data is “negative.”
The GPSS approaches dominate all other methods for
nearly the entire test range, with βMAX performing
best overall.
Additionally, for each test we use an exhaustive search
to find the subset with the highest LLR. The ratios of
the LLR of approximate GPSS solutions to LLR(w∗)
are shown in Fig. 2. Note that all approximation meth-
ods are relatively close to the optimal value. While
the βMAX approach dominates at large magnitudes,
the GRQ dominates at small magnitudes and achieves
a relatively stable ratio across all tests.
1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2
Magnitude of anomaly
0.84
0.86
0.88
0.9
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1
R
at
io
 o
f L
LR
Ratio of detected max LLR to true max LLR
beta-MAX
GRQ
stepwise
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
Size of Neighborhood
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
T
im
e 
(s
ec
on
ds
)
Time to Compute Subset Scan
beta-MAX
GRQ
stepwise
GPNS
Exhaustive
Figure 2: Numeric tests of GPNS and GPSS com-
pared to exhaustive evaluation of LLR(w∗). Left plot:
ratio of maximum LLR identified by GPSS to true
maximum LLR. Right plot: run time.
To test the methods’ scalability we vary the maximum
neighborhood size and measure run time. In Fig. 2 we
compare GPSS, GPNS, and an exhaustive search for
the optimal subset. The exhaustive search quickly be-
comes computationally intractable. Despite the added
flexibility, GPSS is faster than GPNS because GP pos-
terior inference is performed for fewer neighborhoods.
We consider the effect of the density of anomalies
on GPSS and GPNS where “density” is defined by
the proportion of anomalous points in the true subset
(Fig. 3). While the stepwise method is competitive
with the βMAX and GRQ approaches at low densities,
its precision and recall drop off steeply at high densi-
ties. Additionally, in relatively low density anomalies,
where the anomalous shapes may be highly irregular,
GPNS has substantially reduced precision and recall.
5.2 Urban opioid overdose deaths
A recent United States opioid epidemic has garnered
national attention (US Department of Health and Hu-
William Herlands, Edward McFowland III, Andrew G. Wilson, Daniel B. Neill
0 0.5 1
Density of anomaly
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
P
re
ci
si
on
Precision
0 0.5 1
Density of anomaly
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
R
ec
al
l
Recall
0 0.5 1
Density of anomaly
0
5
10
15
20
25
S
iz
e 
of
 d
et
ec
te
d 
su
bs
et
Size of detected subset
beta-MAX
GRQ
stepwise
GPNS
Figure 3: Precision, recall, and size of detected subset
for GPSS and GPNS methods over subsets of varying
density within a neighborhood.
man Services, 2016). We study monthly opioid over-
dose deaths in New York from 1999-2015 (US CDC,
2017). Data is provided at a county level for Man-
hattan, Brooklyn, Queens, the Bronx, Nassau County,
and Suffolk County. Data is missing for some months
in different counties. We apply GPSS and baseline ap-
proaches jointly to data across all time, latitude, and
longitude, with randomization testing at α = 0.05.
All three GPSS approaches identify two statistically
significant anomalous patterns. While precise points
2000 2005 2010 2015
10
20
30
Nassau
2000 2005 2010 2015
10
20
30
40
Brooklyn
2000 2005 2010 2015
10
15
20
25
Queens
2000 2005 2010 2015
10
20
30
40
Manhattan
2000 2005 2010 2015
10
20
30
40
Bronx
beta-MAX
2000 2005 2010 2015
10
20
30
40
Suffolk
2000 2005 2010 2015
10
20
30
Nassau
2000 2005 2010 2015
10
20
30
40
Brooklyn
2000 2005 2010 2015
10
15
20
25
Queens
2000 2005 2010 2015
10
20
30
40
Manhattan
2000 2005 2010 2015
10
20
30
40
Bronx
baseline SVM
2000 2005 2010 2015
10
20
30
40
Suffolk
Figure 4: Monthly opioid overdose deaths in New
York from 1999-2015. Top plot depicts the two statisti-
cally significant anomalies detected by βMAX . Bottom
plot depicts points detected by the one-class SVM.
selected by the methods differ slightly, Fig. 4 depicts
the two anomalous regions discovered by βMAX in blue
circles and red crosses. With the exception of the in-
dependent subset scan, the baseline methods failed to
discover a coherent anomalous pattern. Instead they
selected individual points across space and time. For
example, see results from the one-class SVM in Fig. 4.
The anomalies detected by GPSS correspond to im-
portant public health events. The blue circles at the
end of 2015 indicate a surge in opioid deaths corre-
sponding to a well known plague of fentanyl-related
deaths in NYC (City of New York Office of the Mayor,
2017). The anomaly denoted by red crosses in 2006
is particularly interesting since it indicates a spike in
opioid deaths immediately preceding the introduction
of community training programs to administer a life-
saving naloxone drug. This may indicate a surge in
fatalities that was cut short by making naloxone more
widely available and educating communities in its use.
5.3 Manhattan 311 requests
New York City’s 311 system enables residents to re-
quest government services. We consider a local pub-
lic health event that occurred on 01/22/16 in up-
per Manhattan. On that day, local news reported
that residents were concerned due to brown tap wa-
ter (Pichardo, 2016; CBS New York, 2016b). Detect-
ing the extent of the residents’ concerns is important
to help identify and mitigate public health risks.
GRQ baseline RobustCov
Figure 5: GPSS and robust covariance results for
daily 311 requests in Manhattan on 01/22/16. Red
squares indicate detected anomalies.
We consider daily 311 requests in Manhattan for the
month of January 2016, aggregated over a 0.08 mile2
grid (City of New York, 2017). We apply GPSS meth-
ods and baseline approaches with neighborhoods of up
to 15 points. All GPSS methods identified an anoma-
lous pattern around the locations and time of the water
discoloration event. Baseline methods tended to sub-
stantially overestimate the anomaly’s extent in both
space and time. These results from January 22 are
represented by the GRQ and the Robust baselines in
Fig. 5. Blue and yellow squares indicate low and high
volume of reports, respectively. Red squares indicate
the top anomalous regions discovered by each method.
Gaussian Process Subset Scanning for Anomalous Pattern Detection in Non-iid Data
Ground truth does not exist for these hyper-local
events so we cannot compute precision and recall.
However, 311 requests have labeled types, although
we used aggregated 311 calls as our data inputs. For
each method we compute the ratio of water-related 311
calls to non-water-related calls in the detected anoma-
lies. This “water signal-to-noise” ratio, listed in Ta-
ble 1, indicates how precisely each method identified
regions associated with many water-related requests.
The entire dataset has a water signal-to-noise of 0.07.
Table 1: Signal-to-noise ratio of water-related 311
calls to non-water-related 311 calls for all methods.
Model Signal-to-Noise
GRQ 7.22
Stepwise 7.22
βMAX 7.22
Independent SS 7.06
Baseline GP 0.44
One-class SVM 0.23
RobustCov 0.12
5.4 Multi-stream: trees and sewers
Using the multi-stream procedure from §4.3, we con-
sider 311 reports of damaged trees and sewer issues.
Both streams indicate weather-related issues: dam-
aged trees indicate high winds while sewer calls in-
dicate substantial precipitation. Together, these data
identify areas with dangerous post-storm conditions.
Each complaint type is fit with an independent GP
and the entire data is scanned jointly for anomalies.
07/13
07/13
07/20
07/20
07/27
stepwise
07/27
Sewers: 
07/13
07/13
07/20
07/20
07/27
stepwise
07/27
Trees: 
Figure 6: 311 calls for damaged trees and sewer issues
from 2016 in Brooklyn. Red squares indicate the top
anomalies discovered by the βmax approach.
We analyze data in Brooklyn aggregated weekly over a
0.08 mile2 grid (City of New York, 2017). We conduct
analyses for 2016 and 2010 with results depicted in
Figs. 6 and 7. The number of sewer reports (per week,
per cell) are plotted on top, and damaged tree reports
on bottom. Red squares indicate the top anomalous
regions discovered using the βmax approach.
The most anomalous regions in 2016 were all concen-
trated during the week of July 20th when a significant
summer storm felled trees and flooded sewers, thus
jointly affecting both data streams (CBS New York,
2016a). Conversely, although the week of July 13th
experienced elevated reports of felled trees no anoma-
lous region is detected since there is no correspond-
ing increase in sewer flooding. This demonstrates how
multi-stream search may help to regulate GPSS.
09/08
09/08
09/15
09/15
09/22
stepwise
09/22
09/08
09/08
09/15
09/15
09/22
stepwise
09/22
Sewers: 
Trees: 
Figure 7: 311 calls for damaged trees and sewer issues
from 2010 in Brooklyn. Red squares indicate the top
anomalies discovered by the βmax approach.
The most anomalous regions in 2010 were all concen-
trated during the week of September 15th when an
urban tornado cut through Brooklyn (AccuWeather,
2013). Unlike the 2016 results, these anomalies only
occurred in reports of damaged trees. Also note the
lone yellow square in the sewer data of September 22.
Though the square indicates elevated number of calls,
GPSS does not consider it anomalous since it does not
represent a systematic shift in space and time.
6 Conclusions
We develop two GP-based subset scanning approaches
to accurately and efficiently detect anomalous patterns
in complex, highly correlated data. The results of
GPNS and GPSS are coherent, powerful, and inter-
pretable. While the simpler GPNS method may be
sufficient for circular clusters, GPSS provides addi-
tional flexibility to accurately identify irregular cluster
shapes. Unlike individual anomaly detection methods,
the spatial locality enforced by our methods ensures
coherent explanation of detected anomalous patterns.
As the 311 and opioid applications demonstrate, our
approaches can be used for studying and informing
policy decisions. Future work could integrate categor-
ical variables or extend to Student-t processes (Shah
et al., 2014) for dealing with heavy-tailed noise.
This work was supported by NSF awards GRFP DGE-
1252522 and IIS-0953330, the RK Mellon Foundation,
and NCSU Laboratory for Analytical Sciences.
William Herlands, Edward McFowland III, Andrew G. Wilson, Daniel B. Neill
A Alternative model MLE
Given data, (x, y), we can determine the optimal mean
shift, β∗ through maximum likelihood estimation as
shown below. Let µ,Σ be the posterior mean and co-
variance of the null model in the domain of x, and
denote E = Σ−1 for brevity.
β∗ = max
β
(
(2π)−
k
2 |Σ|− 12 exp(−1
2
(y − wβ − µ)T
E(y − wβ − µ))
)
= max
β
− 1
2
(y − wβ − µ)TE(y − wβ − µ)
= max
β
(y − µ)TEwβ − 1
2
(wβ)TE(wβ)
(8)
We take the derivative with respect to β and set it to
zero
δLLR(w)
δβ
= (y − µ)TEw − (wβ∗)TE(w) = 0
⇒ (wβ∗)TE(w) = (y − µ)TEw
⇒ β∗ = w
TE(y − µ)
wTEw
(9)
B Iterative βMAX algorithm to
approximate optimal subset
Since the derivation of βMAXi is conditional on a sub-
set w, we obtain the conditional optimal subset. In
order to approximate an optimal solution we use iter-
atively compute the conditional optimal subset begin-
ning with a null subset, w = ~0. This is an O(`k log(k))
algorithm for some ` number of iterations, where k is
the size of the neighborhood. Pseudo-code is depicted
in Alg. 3.
Algorithm 3: Iterative βMAXi algorithm
Result: Highest scoring subset w∗
Initialize w = ~0;
for l = 1 : ` do
Compute βMAXi ∀i conditioned on the current
value of w;
Find highest scoring subset, w(l), using a linear
search over sorted βMAXi ;
Compute LLR(w(l));
Set w = w(l);
end
Choose w∗ = argmaxw(l) LLR(w
(l))
C Constrained βMAX optimiza-
tion over blocks
Although we focus on unconstrained subsets searching
within neighborhoods, real world applications some-
times require a more constrained optimization. For
example, in spatiotemporal phenomena it is often use-
ful to consider anomalous patterns that are nearby in
space and contiguous over time. We can enforce such
constraints by predefining mutually exclusive blocks
of points, (x(B), y(B)) ⊆ (x(n), y(n)) where points in a
block must all either be included in, or excluded from,
a subset.
When considering blocks of points we can compute the
total contribution from all points in the block, though
we must also account for additional off-diagonal terms
in E due to the blocking of data points. Following the
derivation in Section 4.2.1 of the main paper, we can
derive the βMAXb for each block,
βMAXB =
∑
i∈B
2
(
E(y(n) − µ)
)
i(∑
j /∈B 2wjEj,i + Ei,i +
∑
k∈B Ek,i
)
(10)
This can be used in a lightly modified version of Al-
gorithm 3 where the βMAXb of blocks, not individual
points, is iteratively computed.
D School Absenteeism
Public schools in New York City record and publish
daily student attendance (NYC Department of Edu-
cation, 2017). Given the importance of education on
future outcomes there is tremendous interest in un-
derstanding patterns of school absenteeism. We con-
sider public school attendance data in Manhattan for
the 2015-2016 school year. The data is messy, with
missing entries and non-uniform placement of school
locations. We aggregate data at weekly level and re-
move the last four weeks of the school year since they
contain known high absenteeism rates that are not of
interest to Department of Education officials.
We apply GPSS methods and baseline approaches
with neighborhoods of up to ten local schools. All
GPSS methods identified an anomaly around January
to February 2016 concentrated on West Side of Man-
hattan. The results from GRQ around the time of
the detected anomaly are presented in Fig. 8. Each
dot represents a school location, with yellow dots in-
dicating high attendance and blue dots indicating low
attendance. The space-time locations of schools in the
top ten anomalous subsets are bordered in red.
The detected anomalies correspond to a category five
blizzard which may have disrupted teachers and stu-
Gaussian Process Subset Scanning for Anomalous Pattern Detection in Non-iid Data
01/18 01/25 02/02 02/09
beta-MAX
02/2201/18 01/25 02/02 02/09
beta-MAX
02/2201/18 01/25 02/02 02/09
beta-MAX
02/ 201/18 01/25 02/02 02/09
beta-MAX
02/ 201/18 01/25 02/02 02/09
beta-MAX
02/22
Figure 8: School absenteeism results from Manhat-
tan using GRQ. Each dot represents a school location,
with yellow dots indicating high attendance and blue
dots indicating low attendance. The space-time loca-
tions of schools in the top ten anomalous subsets are
bordered in red.
dents from attending school even though no snow day
closings were reported at the time. Further research is
required to understand why the West Side of Man-
hattan differed systematically from the rest of the
borough. Baseline anomaly detection methods did
not identify a coherent anomaly and instead detected
anomalies throughout the year.
References
AccuWeather. Photos: Tornadoes ransacked
Brooklyn, Queens in 2010, 2