 
Archaeological	  and	  chronological	  context................................................................2	  
Morphological	  characteristics	  of	  Saqqaq	  hair .........................................................3	  
Radiocarbon	  dating ..........................................................................................................6	  
Stable	  light	  isotope	  analysis	  of	  the	  Saqqaq	  hair......................................................8	  
Sample	  preparation....................................................................................................... 10	  
Sequencing........................................................................................................................ 12	  
Estimates	  of	  DNA	  damage	  and	  quantitative	  PCR ................................................. 12	  
Y-­chromosome	  SNP	  verification................................................................................ 14	  
Genome	  assembly........................................................................................................... 15	  
Genotyping........................................................................................................................ 19	  
Analyses	  of	  heterozygote	  calls	  made	  on	  chromosome	  X	  using	  the	  diploid	  
genotyping	  model........................................................................................................... 22	  
Genotyping	  the	  mitochondrial	  genome	  with	  the	  diploid	  model .................... 27	  
Contamination	  estimated	  by	  private	  European	  allele	  frequency .................. 27	  
Y	  chromosome	  based	  demography .......................................................................... 31	  
PCA	  analysis ..................................................................................................................... 33	  
Estimation	  of	  inbreeding ............................................................................................. 34	  
Estimation	  of	  inbreeding	  across	  the	  genome........................................................ 37	  
Estimation	  of	  divergence	  times ................................................................................. 38	  
Ancestry	  analyses........................................................................................................... 40	  
Comparative	  human	  genome	  data............................................................................ 42	  
Metagenomic	  analysis	  of	  the	  sequence	  reads....................................................... 43	  
Functional	  SNP	  assessment......................................................................................... 44	  
Supplementary	  References ......................................................................................... 46	  
Supplementary Tables S1 - S14 ................................................................................52 
Supplementary Figures S1 - S16...............................................................................72 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
doi: 10.1038/nature08835doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 1
Archaeological and chronological context 
The human hair tuft (registration no. Qt 86 85/261: 12) was excavated in 1986 at 
Qeqertasussuk (Qt), a Saqqaq Culture site, located in the southernmost part of Disko 
Bay, West Greenland (Fig. 1a). Details of the site can be found in [1,2]. Due to its 
permafrost conditions, the Qt site enables excellent organic preservation – 
specifically, together with the Qajaa site, located 80 kilometers to the north, Qt is the 
only early Palaeo-Eskimo site to show preservation of organic materials such as 
wood, skin, hair and baleen [3,4,1]. In contrast to Qajaa, the Qt site holds no traces of 
later cultures (Dorset- or Thule), and Qt is the only Saqqaq site where human remains 
have been recovered (four limb bones and four tufts of hair).  
 
At the Qt site, the sample was excavated from Section C, a 1 meter wide trench 
through the culture layers (different dumping areas) at the northern part of the Qt site 
(Fig. S1). The tuft was found embedded in the permafrost adjacent to a reindeer 
cranium in Square 85/261, Layer 15, approximately 40 cm below the present surface 
(Fig. S2). The hair tuft was found by a team member of Danish origin (Egon Geisler). 
The tuft was excavated over a period of several hours from the thawing culture layer 
15 using a trowel, subsequently dried in the open air, and then stored in a labeled 
plastic bag. As with all other finds from Qeqertasussuk, the hair tuft was sent to 
Denmark for further analyses. Here, the hair was analyzed at the Copenhagen 
University Hospital, where it was determined to be of possible human origin based on 
morphological studies. Subsequently, it was stored at the University of Copenhagen 
and, later, at the National Museum of Denmark in a plastic bag awaiting further 
analyses. 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 2
According to the archaeologist in charge of the excavation, who also curates the hair 
sample (author BG), it has not been touched by anyone likely to be of Asian ancestry, 
and although some ethnic Greenlanders were present during the excavation, they did 
not handle the sample. The sample has, on the contrary, been handled by a number of 
ethnically Danish scientists. Given the low level of European contamination in the 
raw sequence reads (a maximum possible estimate of ~0.8%, see main text), despite 
this unprotected handling by Danes, it is unlikely that our findings of clearly Asian 
DNA should result from sample based contamination. The results confirm previous 
results showing that ancient hair can be effectively decontaminated (see main text). 
 
Morphological characteristics of Saqqaq hair 
A small subsample of hairs from the Saqqaq hair tuft used for DNA sequencing was 
subjected to a morphological examination. The hairs, to the unaided eye were black in 
colour and coarse to the touch. A number of hairs were selected for a more detailed 
microscopic examination. Briefly, the hairs were mounted in permanent mounting 
medium (XAM) on glass microscope slides for detailed transmitted light microscopy, 
which was performed using a Leica compound microscope (100-400x magnification 
range). Scale cast patterns and cross-sections were produced in accordance with 
Brunner and Coman [5]. Additionally, fibres were mounted onto aluminium stubs, 
gold-coated and imaged under high vacuum conditions using an FEI Quanta 400 
scanning electron microscope. 
 
Transmitted light microscopy revealed hairs that are moderately pigmented, with a 
continuous opaque medulla present in most of them. The hairs, despite their age, were 
comparable to scalp hairs of modern hominids in general appearance, as illustrated in 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 3
Figure 1b-d. The shaft diameters of the widest Saqqaq hairs measured approximately 
100 µm. This is atypical of Caucasian scalp hairs that have an average shaft diameter 
of approximately 70 - 80 µm. However, this is consistent with the shaft diameters of 
Mongoloid scalp hairs are typically in the region of approximately 90-100 µm 
(measured on longitudinal axis of the mounted hairs). 
 
Fungal tunnelling was apparent in the majority of the Saqqaq hairs; this phenomenon 
is apparent in both forensic and archaeologically derived hairs, and appears as fine 
cracks in the shaft. Fungal tunnelling has been associated with hairs that have been 
buried in, or in contact with, soil containing keratinophilic fungi [6]. Figures S3 and 
S4 illustrate examples of the fungal tunnelling apparent in many of the hair shafts 
which bore several of these ‘tunnels’. Surface debris adhered to the majority of the 
Saqqaq hair shafts. It is likely that the debris found on the surface of the hair shafts 
are fungal growths responsible for the tunnelling of the hair shafts. Some of the 
growths had protuberances emanating from them. The image in Figure S5 illustrates 
an example of the type of debris present on many of the hair shafts. There are three 
stages in the fungal attack on hair, the first is the lifting of the cuticle, the second is 
the erosion of the cortex and the third is the tunnelling of the hair by specialised 
fungal hyphae [7]. 
 
Scale cast patterns were produced from Saqqaq hairs and modern hair. The results, 
illustrated in Figures S6 and S7, clearly show that the Saqqaq hair, stripped of its 
cuticle yields an almost smooth scale cast pattern of the exposed cortex which is in 
stark contrast with the scale cast pattern derived from a healthy modern hair. Probable 
remnants of a tiny portion of the cuticle ware apparent at the edge of one of the 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 4
Saqqaq hairs, which appears to show the cuticular scales comparable with human 
scale cast pattern (Fig. S8). These striae do not appear to be the result of fungal 
tunnelling, as none were seen in close succession to each other. Furthermore, these 
striae are very typical of scale patterns exhibited by hairs. 
 
In reflected light (i.e. to the naked eye) the Saqqaq hairs were black in colour; 
however, under transmitted light the Saqqaq hairs were red/orange in colour. This 
phenomenon of ancient hairs having a red hue, implying the donor had red hair, is 
well documented [7]. Hair contains a mixture of black-brown eumelanin (high 
amount in brown/black hair) and red-yellow phaeomelanin (low amount in 
black/brown hair). Phaeomelanin is much more stable than eumelanin, thus, the 
phaeomelanin in the hair is better preserved over time than the eumelanin thus giving 
the hair an eventual reddish coloration.  
 
Cross-sections of modern Caucasian scalp hairs and the Saqqaq hairs were produced 
(Fig. 1d). The modern hair were found to be oblong/oval in shape with a crisp, thin 
white outline which is the cuticle covering the cortex (pigment granules are visible in 
the modern scalp hair cuticle due to the hairs being very heavily pigmented). In 
comparison the Saqqaq hairs revealed a ‘fuzzy’ outline due to the lack of cuticle and 
appear to be more circular in cross-section than the modern hair (Fig. 1d). This 
circular cross-section is typical for Mongoloid scalp hairs than Caucasian scalp hairs, 
which supports the wide shaft diameter of many of the Saqqaq hairs. 
 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 5
Radiocarbon dating 
Radiocarbon dating was undertaken at the Oxford Radiocarbon Accelerator Unit 
(ORAU, RLAHA, University of Oxford (Table S1). The dating process was enhanced 
by the high level of preservation of the materials, a result of the cold preservation 
conditions. 
 
Samples of reindeer (Rangifer tarandus) bone were pre-treated for dating using the 
Oxford gelatinisation/ultrafiltration procedure [8], which is based on previous work 
by Brown et al. [9]. Coarsely ground bone powder (between 360-590 mg) was loaded 
into a pre-combusted 20 mL test tube and decalcified with 20ml 0.5M HCl: two times 
at RT for 1-2hrs, overnight (or until CO2 ceased to be evolved). The collagen was 
rinsed three times with water and then with 20ml 0.1M NaOH for 30 mins at RT, 
rinsed again and then reacted with 20ml 0.5M HCl for 15 mins at RT. After a third 
water rinse, the crude collagen was gelatinised in pH3 solution at 75°C for 20 hours. 
 
The gelatin solution was filtered using an 8mm polyethylene Eezi-filter™ and the 
insoluble residues discarded. The filtered gelatin was then pipetted into an ultra-filter 
(Vivaspin™ 15 30kD MWCO), centrifuged at 2500-3000 rpm until 0.5-1 mL of the 
>30 kD gelatin fraction remained and then freeze dried ready for combustion in a 
CHN analyser. The collagen yields ranged from 3.3 to over 11%, indicative of the 
good state of preservation of the bones, as expected. 
 
22.8 mg of the human hair sample was rinsed in 80°C 1M HCl for one hour, 0.1 M 
NaOH at RT for one hour and finally with a repeat 1M HCl rinse. Between each 
reaction, the hair was rinsed to neutrality with distilled water. Finally, the pre-treated 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 6
hair was freeze-dried and weighed. The yield after pre-treatment suggests that the 
material is excellently preserved.  
 
Sub-samples of the pre-treated hair or collagen were combusted and mass 
spectrometrically analysed using a Europa ANCA Roboprep interfaced to a Europa 
20/20 MS operating under continuous-flow mode. The C:N atomic ratio for the hair 
sample was 3.7, wholly within the acceptable range for this sample type according to 
the work of others analysing the C:N ranges of hair keratin (3.0-3.8; [10]). The C:N 
ratios of the collagen samples were all within the range 2.9—3.5, indicating 
acceptable values. All other analytical data shown in Table S1 supports the 
observation that the bones were well preserved and the collagen extracted acceptable 
in its quality.  
 
Graphite was prepared by reduction of CO2 over an iron catalyst in an excess H2 
atmosphere at 560°C prior to AMS radiocarbon measurement [11]. The conventional 
radiocarbon ages BP are listed in Table S1.  
 
The fragmented reindeer cranium (Qt 86 FC 85/261: 11), that was found in direct 
association with the human hair tuft (Qt 86 FC 85/261: 12) was AMS dated to 3628 ± 
28 BP (OxA 18749). Layer 15, in which these specimens came from, has previously 
been conventionally dated using twig materials to 3680 – 3310 BP [1].  
 
The human hair determination is from an individual whose diet included high levels 
of marine mammal protein (see below; Table S1), which is in concurrence with the 
analysis of faunal remains from the site, that show an extraordinarily heavy reliance 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 7
on marine mammals, especially harp and ringed seal (Pagophilus groenlandicus and 
Pusa hispida, respectively) [1]. This strongly implies the presence of a marine 
reservoir effect. This reservoir effect can be corrected by determining the local offset 
compared with the average world ocean value. Using modern collections of shellfish 
from the region, we calculated a local ΔR value of 140 ± 99 yr, (based on the ages 
recovered from modern shellfish from Disko Bay, Greenland, using the standard 
deviation as the square root of variance [12-16] (Marine Reservoir database, 
http://intcal.qub.ac.uk/marine/). This was used in the calibration of the result in Table 
S2. Note that this assumes that marine protein was the exclusive source of protein for 
the human. This is unlikely, but the stable isotope values do show that this was the 
overwhelming source of protein. The calibrated age ranges are shown in Figure 1f. 
We plot the calibrated human hair determination in two ways, one corrected for the 
reservoir effect, the other not. 
 
Taken together, the dating of the hair tuft itself (corrected for the marine effect), 
supports an early Saqqaq context for the human remains and confirms earlier 
determinations. We estimate Layer 15 to span the period 4100 – 3900 cal. BP. 
 
Stable light isotope analysis of the Saqqaq hair 
Subsamples of the Saqqaq hair sample were prepared for stable light isotope analysis 
at the University of Oxford and the University of Bradford according to standard 
protocols (adapted from [10,17]). The hair fibres were soaked in a 2:1 (v/v) mixture 
of methanol and chloroform (for two hours at Oxford and overnight at Bradford), 
followed by sonication and rinsing three times in deionised water. Following the 
cleaning, the samples were dried completely and weighed into tin foils. They were 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 8
analysed for carbon and nitrogen isotopes at the Research Laboratory for Archaeology 
and the History of Art (RLAHA, University of Oxford) using a Carlo Erba 1108 
elemental analyzer coupled to a SerCon Geo 20/20 mass spectrometer in continuous-
flow mode, and, at the University of Bradford using a ThermoFinnigan Delta plus XP 
mass spectrometer. Data are reported using conventional delta notation taken relative 
to internationally recognised standards. 
 
Stable light isotopes can be used as a proxy for diet, with carbon differentiating 
between the major photosynthetic pathways in plants as well as terrestrial versus 
marine food intake and nitrogen indicative of the extent of animal protein 
consumption. Results from Oxford and Bradford are plotted in Figure 1e, which also 
includes the following hair samples processed in Oxford for comparison purposes: Qt 
87 FB 20/20 (another Saqqaq sample from similar context); and, 6 Thule individuals 
(Uummannaq, 16th-17th century). All data points are presented as averages of 2 or 3 
replicate runs, except 1 Thule sample, which was processed once due to small sample 
size. The expected and measured carbon and nitrogen isotopic measurements of 
standards run with the samples are noted in Table S3. The atomic C/N ratios of the 
samples fell within the acceptable range for keratin of 3.0-3.8 [10].  
 
The results unequivocally support the reliance of the Saqqaq on high trophic level 
marine food resources. This can be contrasted with published data for modern hunting 
and fishing Inuit Greenlanders from roughly the same geographic region (plotted as 
‘Modern Uummannaq Omnivores’), who supplement their diet high in local marine 
food (seal, whale, halibut) with foods imported from Denmark (bread, cereals, dairy 
products), as well as with modern Danish omnivores and vegans [18]. The data can 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 9
also be compared with other published carbon and nitrogen isotope data for Dorset 
remains, Thule-era burials from northwest Hudson Bay and proto-historic burials 
from Southampton Island [19], which together show varied exploitation of marine and 
terrestrial resources including fish, shellfish and avifauna, ringed seal (Pusa hispida), 
walrus (Odobenus rosmarus), bowhead whale (Balaena mysticetus), reindeer 
(Rangifer tarandus), musk ox (Ovibos moschatus), arctic fox (Alopex lagopus), hare 
(Lepus) and wolverine (Gulo gulo). 
 
Sample preparation  
To rid the hair of macroscopic contaminants such as small branches and soil, the hair 
was manually cleaned in certified DNA-free molecular biology grade water. This was 
followed by a wash in 1% hypochlorite (final concentration) solution, to remove DNA 
contaminants [20]. Lastly the hair was again washed several times in demineralised 
water to avoid damage from residual hypochlorite. 
 
Three similarly sized cuts of hair (1.5-2g) were digested overnight at 55°C with 
agitation in 15ml of buffer containing, 10mM Tris pH 8, 10mM NaCl, 5mM CaCl2, 
2.5mM EDTA pH 8, 10% proteinase K solution, 40mM DTT and 2% SDS. An 
additional 5ml of buffer was added and the samples were incubated another 24hrs. 
The digested samples were phenol/phenol/chloroform extracted, and the aqueous 
phases were concentrated to 500µl using a 10kDa centricon column (Millipore, 
Billerica, MA). This was followed with 3 purifications on Qiaquick columns (Qiagen, 
Hilden, Germany), with the following modifications to the protocol, an additional 
wash with 500µl Salton buffer A (MP Biomedicals, Illkirch, France), 2 washes with 
Qiagen PE buffer, a 3 minute centrifugation at 13000 g to dry the filter, and finally a 5 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 10
minute incubation with 50µl Qiagen EB buffer. A second round of extractions were 
carried out with a few minor differences. Namely a single 50ml digestion was 
performed, and after the phenol/phenol/chloroform extraction concentration, a 30kDa 
filter was used to concentrate the digest to 2ml, which in turn was purified across 8 
Qiaquick spin columns. Final elutions were in 30µl EB buffer. 
 
Extracted DNA was built into Illumina index libraries, following manufactures 
protocol, but without DNA fragmentation. Volumes of DNA sample:adaptor were 
adjusted for short input DNA to approximate the suggested 1:10 ratio. Libraries were 
run on a 2% agarose gel, and gel purified using Qiagen gel extraction kit, following 
manufactures guidelines. Amplification of purified libraries were done using Phusion 
polymerase (Finnzymes, Espoo, Finland) with a final mixture of, 1X Phusion HF 
buffer, 0.2mM dNTP, 0.5µM Multiplexing PCR primer 1.0 (5’- 
AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACACTCTTTCCCTACACGACGCTCTT
CCGATCT), 0.01µM Multiplexing PCR primer 2.0 (5’- 
GTGACTGGAGTTCAGACGTGTGCTCTTCCGATCT), 0.5µM PCR primer Index 
X (5’- CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATN6GTGACTGGAGTTC) (where X 
is one of 12 different indexes, and N6 is the corresponding tag), 3% DMSO, 0.02U/µl 
Phusion polymerase, 3-5µl of template and water to 50µl final volume. Primers are 
part of Illumina’s Multiplexing Sample Prep Oligo Kit. Cycling conditions were as 
stated in the Illumina protocol for a total of 18 cycles. PCR products were finally gel 
purified before sequencing. 
 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 11
Sequencing 
The indexed DNA libraries were loaded on an Illumina Cluster Station to generate 
sequencing template clusters on flowcells by bridge amplification PCR. The 
workflow followed the manufacturer’s instruction, briefly; template hybridisation, 
isothermal amplification, linearisation, blocking, denaturisation and hybridisation of 
the sequencing primers. The flowcells were loaded on to an Illumina Genome 
Analyzer II for sequencing. The read was sequenced first followed by 6bp-index. The 
images were transformed into intensity files that were then processed to produce 
DNA read sequences using the Illumina base-calling pipeline (Illumina Pipeline 
v1.4). 
 
Estimates of DNA damage and quantitative PCR 
Damage-driven deamination of cytosine yields uracil, while damage-driven 
deamination of 5’-methylcytosine yields thymine. Phusion polymerase is unable to 
replicate through uracil, thus is expected to stop whenever uracil is encountered in a 
sequence. In contrast, the Phusion will amplify through the thymine derivation of 5’-
methylcytosine, although given both that 5’methylcytosine is relatively rare in the 
human genome, and that a damage event is required at this position, it can be 
hypothesised that this will contribute very little to the overall damage signal. The 
ability of Phusion to amplify damaged DNA (deaminated cytosine) was estimated by 
PCR amplifying samples with known high damage rates using both Phusion and HiFi 
polymerase. Samples were extracts of 2 reindeer bones (Rangifer Tarandus) dated 
13,150±130 and 16,190±190 14C yr BP, and 1 woolly rhinoceros bone (Coelodonta 
antiquitatis) (not dated). The manufacturer’s recommendations were followed for 
each enzyme, generic16S mtDNA mammalian fusion primers were used (Forward: 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 12
5’- GCCTCCCTCGCGCCATCAGN8CGGTTGGGGTGACCTCGGA, reverse: 5’- 
GCCTTGCCAGCCCGCTCAGN8GCTGTTATCCCTAGGGTAACT, N8 represent 
different 8bp tags that were used for multiplexing purposes), and finally products 
were sequenced on a GS FLX (Roche, Germany). HiFi setup was as follows: 1X HiFi 
PCR buffer, 2mM MgSO4, 0.4mM dNTP, 0.4µM primer (each), 1µl extract. Phusion 
setup was as follows: 1X HF buffer, 0.4mM dNTP, 0.4µM primer (each), 1 µl extract. 
PCR program were as follows, HiFi cycling parameters were: 94°C 4’, (94°C 30”, 
54°C 30”, 68°C 30”) x 50 cycles, 72°C 7’, Phusion parameters were: 98°C 30”, (98°C 
15”, 54°C 30”, 72°C 30”) x 50 cycles, 72°C 7’. PCR products were gel purified and 
sequenced on a GS FLX following the manufacturer’s protocol for amplicon 
sequencing; run size was LR25. A total of 63190 sequences with match to tag and 
primers were generated. 6 tags were used representing the 3 individuals with each 
enzyme. After trimming tag and primer, sequences were aligned using Muscle v3.7 
[21], and for each position base composition was analysed to generate a 4x4 matrix 
with base calls and errors/damages (Table S4). When grouping into complementary 
pairs of errors, the data can be summarised in a graph showing the error rate for each 
individual (Fig. S9). When calibrated with this, the damage based errors drop from 
1.6-6.1% to 0.2-0.5% (p<2.2e-16 for all, Fisher’s exact test).  
 
To estimate the copy number of DNA templates present in the extract both with, and 
without, cytosine deamination-based damage, we performed a number of quantitative 
PCRs (qPCRs). A single forward, and 4 reverse, primers, with products of lengths 
between 85-163bp (33-110bp excl. primers) were chosen (Forward: L16162 5’-
CATAAATACTTGACCACCTGTAGTACATA, Reverse: H16196 5’-
GATTGCTGTACTTGCTTGTAAGC, H16223 5’-
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 13
GCAGTTGATGTGTGATAGTTGAG, H16250 5’-GGTGAGGGGTGGCTTTGG, 
H16273 5’-GGGTGGGTAGGTTTGTTGGTATCC). Standards were generated for 
each primer pair from a purified PCR product (same setup as below) as follows. 
Firstly, the concentration of the PCR product was measured using a Nanodrop 
(Nanodrop Products, DE). Subsequently the copy number in the standard was 
estimated using, c/M*NA, where c is concentration, M is molecular weight of PCR 
product and NA is Avogadro’s constant. qPCRs were performed with both Phusion 
and HiFi using the four primer pairs. HiFi setup was as follows: 1X HiFi PCR buffer, 
2mM MgSO4, 1µl Rox/SYBR mix, 0.2mM dNTP, 0.4µM primer (each), 0.02U/µl 
HiFi, 1µl template. Phusion setup was as follows: 1X HF buffer, 1µl Rox/SYBR mix, 
0.2mM dNTP, 0.4µM primer (each), 0.02U/µl Phusion, 1µl template. qPCRs were 
run on MX3005 (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) with the following cycling conditions, 
HiFi: 95C 10’, (95°C 30”, 60°C 30”, 68°C 30”) x 40 cycles; Phusion: 98°C 5’, (98°C 
15”, 60°C 30”, 72°C 30”) x 40 cycles. The number of starting templates at each 
length was approximated for each of the two enzymes (Fig. S10). The results show 
approximately 1.8million copies/µl DNA extract of 85-bp mtDNA. Damage was 
estimated to be no more than 1%, by plotting a very simple model of damage on top 
of the HiFi amplified sample. The model estimated damage as H*(1-D)^L, where H is 
HiFi measurements, D is damage rate (here 1%) and L is length of PCR product 
exclusive primers. 
 
Y-chromosome SNP verification 
Primers were designed to target specific diagnostic Y-chromosome markers, in part to 
verify the shotgun sequencing and in part to gain information on uncovered regions. 
Selected markers (marker names as defined in [22]) were MEH2 (MEH2_F: 5’- 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 14
AAATTTTGAGTAAGCCATCACCCCA, MEH2_R: 5’-
CCACATGTAATTGCAAAAACTGCATTG), M346 (M346_F: 5’- 
GGGAAAGGCAGCCAAGAGGACA, M346_R: 5’- 
TCCACTCACTCTGCCTACCTGA), M3 (M3_F: 5’- 
GGGCATCTTTCATTTTAGGTACCAGC, M3_R: 5’- 
TCTGCTGCCAGGGCTTTCAA), M216 (M216_F: 5’-
CTCAACCAGTTTTTATGAAGCTAG, M216_R: 5’-
CTGAATTCTGACACTGCTAGTTAT), and M242 (M242_F: 5’-
TAGTATCTTGAACTTATATATG, M242_R: 5’-CACGTTAAGACCAATGC). 
Amplification was performed using HiFi. HiFi setup: 1X HiFi PCR buffer, 2mM 
MgSO4, 1µl Rox/SYBR mix, 0.2mM dNTP, 0.4µM primer (each), 0.02U/µl HiFi, 1µl 
template. PCR program were as follows, HiFi: 94°C 4’, (94°C 40”, 52°C 35”, 68°C 
40”) x 48 cycles, 72°C 10’. PCR products were purified using Qiaquick columns 
(Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), and cloned using the TOPO TA cloning kit (Invitrogen, 
Carlsbad, CA) following the manufacturer’s guidelines. Cloned product were 
amplified and sequenced on an ABI3130xl (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA), 
following the manufacturer’s protocol. 
 
Genome assembly 
As described in the main text, short index sequences of length 6 nucleotides were 
used to distinguish DNA from the PCR amplification from contaminants. Only reads 
with the correct index were used in the downstream analyses. We used a stringent 
criterion of 100% match in the index sequences to lower the risk of contamination. 
93.17% of all reads had the correct index and were used in the mapping. 
 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 15
The correctly indexed reads were mapped to the human genome chromosomes 1-22, 
X, Y, and mtDNA (hg18, NCBI build 36.1,	  
http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/hg18/	  chromosomes/). Due to the 
fragmentation of the ancient DNA, most reads contain part of the 3' primer/adapter 
sequence. It is difficult to correctly identify a short primer segment in the end of a 
read where the sequencing quality is generally lower. Therefore we used a program 
(Sesam) that was developed to perform the mapping such that the most likely split 
between a genomic match and the primer was found. The quality scores are ascii 
“phred scores” and translated to error probabilities p=10(i-d)/10, where i is the ascii 
value and d is the base of the conversion (33 or 64). After translating the quality 
scores to probabilities, the read sequence is turned into a position specific scoring 
matrix with a score of log2((1-p)/q(a)) for the nucleotide a, which is called and 
log2(p/3q(b)) for another nucleotide b, where q(a) is the frequency of base a in the 
human reference genome. The search is done using an enhanced suffix array index 
[23] of the genome. In this search only sequences scoring more than 50% of the 
maximal score for the sequence are reported, and to speed up the search, it is also 
required that the sum of scores of the first 20 nucleotides is such that we only allow a 
single mismatch with the lowest quality score. The probability of each match is 
approximated by pi = 2s(i)/∑j2s(j), where s(j) is the score of match j of the read. Only if 
this probability is larger than 0.9, is the match reported as a unique match (this is 
more stringent than most other methods that rely only on the number of mismatches). 
Reads with more than 100 matches above the threshold are also ignored. 
 
Using Sesam, we uniquely mapped 49.20% of all the correctly indexed reads. The 
average length of the mapped reads after primer removal is 55.27 nucleotides, and the 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 16
GC-content is 0.53. The mapped reads were sorted by chromosome and position for 
further analysis. To address the problem of clonal expansion from the PCR, reads of 
the same length from the same PCR library that map to the same position and strand 
in a chromosome were considered clones. Instead of removing them completely, a 
collapsed representative sequence was generated from the ‘clones’, that took into 
account the nucleotides and quality scores at each position. The collapsed clone was 
made by creating a Lx4 scoring matrix, where L is the read length of the clones. For 
each position 1 to L, the sum of the probabilities (in log-space) of observing each of 
the 4 nucleotides was calculated from the read nucleotides and quality scores seen in 
all the clones at that position. The collapsed clonal representative was defined by 
choosing the most likely nucleotide in the matrix at each position, and the 
corresponding qualities were calculated from the summed log-transformed 
probabilities. Because of this, the new error rates can be much smaller than 10-4, 
which is the minimum for the Illumina quality scores. We extend the quality range to 
10-5. The reason for not including even lower error rates is because errors might occur 
early in preparative process (e.g. PCR amplification), and these would get too much 
weight in the SNP calling and bias the result. 
 
Of the mapped reads, 51.4% were retained unaltered, and the remaining clonal reads 
were collapsed into approximately 172 million so-called collapsed reads 
(corresponding to 17.23% of the total number of mapped reads after clonal removal). 
After this step, we effectively mapped 28.47% of all out initial reads uniquely to the 
human genome. Since the nucleotides in the collapsed reads are corrected based on all 
the clones in a set, we performed primer removal on the collapsed sequences to avoid 
including high quality primer sequences in the genotyping, which would significantly 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 17
bias the SNP calls. Even if Sesam could not locate the transition from genomic 
sequence to primer, the enhanced quality read helped us solve that problem. This was 
taken care of by performing ungapped alignment of the 3' end of the reads to the 5' 
end of the reverse-complemented primer sequences. The best alignment (if any) was 
used to truncate the sequence. To accommodate sequencing errors we allowed for a 
number of mismatches of up to 1/3 of the alignment length. 
 
After the clonal analysis, a coverage map was calculated for each chromosome. This 
step generates a file with a line for each position covered in the chromosome. Each 
line contains information on the nucleotide in the reference genome, the sequence 
depth and a list of the pairs of nucleotides and corresponding qualities that cover the 
position. To avoid false SNP calls due to insertion and deletion events, which would 
accumulate in the 3’ end of the read, we ignore the last 7 nucleotides in the low 
quality, 3’ end of each read in this step. The 7 nucleotide trimming is based on an 
analysis of error frequencies that showed an increase in the overall error rate in the 
last 7 positions of the reads. We cover 79.31% of the complete human genome with 
an average depth of 16x across the whole genome (if limiting ourselves to only the 
positions covered, we have on average depth of 20x) (Table S5). We calculated the 
percentage of sequences of length 50 or 60 that occur more than once in the complete 
genome. For length 50, 15.2% of the genome is repetitive and for length 60, 13.3% is 
repetitive, so we estimate the theoretically highest coverage to be 85-87% with an 
average read length of 55. 
 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 18
Genotyping 
The limited coverage and the special sources of errors from ancient DNA sequencing 
pose special challenges to genotyping. We therefore developed a probabilistic 
genotyping method, called SNPest (Single Nucleotide Polymorphism estimation), 
which takes both quality-scores and alternative sources of read errors explicitly into 
account. This allows sensitive genotyping, while avoiding systematic wrong calls due 
to read errors. The method is based on a generative probabilistic model of the 
sampling and sequencing of read nucleotides from the genotype at a given position in 
the ancient diploid genome. The model defines a probability distribution over 
observed and unobserved random variables. The observed random variables 
correspond to the light intensities from the sequencing reactions (I) and to the human 
reference nucleotide (H). The unobserved variables correspond to the genotype at the 
given position in the true ancient genome (G), the nucleotides in the ancient DNA 
fragments corresponding to our reads (A), and the nucleotides present in the mapped 
reads (R). The combined probability distribution for a single position can be written 
as: 
 
€ 
P(H,G,A,R,I) = P(H)P(G |H) P(Ai |G)P(Ri | Ai)P(Ii |Ri)
i=1
n
∏  
 
Where n denotes the number of observed reads at a given position and the index 
variable i, used with A, G, and I, denotes a specific read. 
 
As can be seen, the complete probability factorises into a number of conditional 
probability terms, of which each has a specific interpretation in the sampling of reads 
from the original genotype at a given position. P(H) defines a uniform prior over the 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 19
human reference bases. P(G|H) defines the conditional distribution of the ten possible 
genotypes (AA, AC, ... , TT), given the reference nucleotide. This distribution was 
derived from the genotype counts of the Yanhuang genome [24]. P(Ai|G) defines a 
conditional distribution over nucleotides in the original (ancient) DNA fragment that 
gave rise to the i'th present day read. P(Ri|Ai) defines a conditional distribution over 
nucleotides in the i'th present day read given the original ancient nucleotide. This term 
models any errors in the present day reads due to PCR amplification, failure to 
remove primers, wrongly mapped reads, etc. This error rate was estimated to 0.33% 
based on all positions larger than 20, since Sesam treats position 1-20 specially, from 
all reads that map to chromosome 1. Finally, P(Ii|Ri) defines the probability of 
observing the observed read intensities, given the read nucleotide. Although we do 
not know the form of P(Ii|Ri), we note that it is proportional to P(Ri|Ii), which is given 
in the form of the quality scores calculated in the Illumina pipeline (v1.4). These 
proportionality factors cancel out in the calculation of the posterior probability given 
below. 
 
Based on a marginalisation of the complete probability distribution, where we sum 
out all the unobserved nuisance parameters (A & R), we calculate the posterior 
probability of the genotypes P(G|I, H). The genotype with the highest posterior 
probability is our prediction at the given position. 
 
For the two sex chromosomes and the mtDNA, a haploid genotyping model was 
developed. The only difference to the above defined diploid model is that the 
unobserved genotype of the ancient genome (G) is now defined over the four single 
nucleotides, instead of the ten possible dinucleotide genotypes of the diploid model. 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 20
This affects P(G|H), which is now estimated from only the X chromosome of the 
Yanhuang genome, and P(Ai|G), which is now simply specified by the identity matrix.  
 
Applying SNPest to all chromosomes we find a total of 2,209,739 differences from 
the reference. Comparing these to dbSNP (v130) we see an overlap of 82.4% with 
positions annotated as single nucleotide polymorphisms. When comparing to all types 
of polymorphisms in dbSNP, we see an overlap of 86.2%. Overlap to other known 
genomes is shown in Figure S11, with the biggest overlap to the Korean and Chinese 
genomes (39.0% and 38.2% respectively). 
  
A high confidence set of genotype calls (Table S5) is defined as follows: 1) Since 
repeat regions will have a higher rate of mapping errors, we exclude these. (The 
repeat annotations were defined by RepeatMasker and downloaded from the UCSC 
Genome Browser, hg18 [25]. 2) We also exclude regions with depth lower than 10x 
or higher than 50x (to avoid poorly covered regions and un-annotated repeats, 
respectively), 3) Only genotype calls with a posterior probability P ≥0.9999 are 
included. 4) For SNPs (defined relative to the reference genome), we require the 
distance to the nearest neighbouring SNP to be at least 5 nucleotides. This is done to 
avoid false SNPs due to indels, which tend to cluster together. The high-confidence 
SNP set contains 353,151 positions with an overlap to single nucleotide 
polymorphisms in dbSNP of 91.0% and an overlap with all polymorphisms in dbSNP 
of 93.2%. 
 
Due to the high copy number of mitochondrial genomes in the cell, we handle this 
slightly different than the nuclear chromosomes. Genotyping is carried out using the 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 21
same model as used for the sex chromosomes, only we do not exclude positions with 
more than 50x depth (average depth on chrM is 3802X).  
 
For positions with more than 200x depth, we randomly sample 200 reads at that 
position for the genotyping. We tested that this has minimal influence on the 
genotype, while the running time per chromosome was changed from days to hours 
(data not shown). By genotyping chromosome 15 and 21 using either approach, 
differences between the two approaches were seen in only 11 of 69,407,765 positions 
(0.000016%) or 58 of 29,842,561 positions (0.000194%) respectively.  
 
Analyses of heterozygote calls made on chromosome X using the diploid 
genotyping model 
Since the Saqqaq genome is from a male individual, only single copies of both sex 
chromosomes are present. Genotyping of these chromosomes is therefore done with 
an especially designed haploid-genotyping model. However, since several factors, 
such as read and mapping errors as well as contamination from modern humans 
(discussed below), can give rise to sites with several nucleotides present, it is of 
interest to identify these sites and analyse their cause. We do this by genotyping the 
sex chromosomes with the diploid genotyping model, and analysing sites that are 
called as heterozygous. Since chromosome Y is known to be notoriously difficult to 
assemble and correctly genotype [26], we focus this analysis on chromosome X only.  
 
The most common cause for observing several nucleotides at a given site in a haploid 
chromosome is read errors. At low quality-scores, these are very frequent. However, 
our genotyping model (SNPest) takes this into account, and sites called as 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 22
heterozygous with a high posterior probability are not well-explained by read errors. 
Errors introduced in the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) are related to these, but will 
be rarer, albeit they can be assigned high quality scores. 
 
A second big source of nucleotide variation at a site is mapping errors. These are 
especially common in regions that align well (e.g. are homologous) to many other 
regions around the genome. This is the case for repeats, such as SINEs and LINEs, 
which will inevitably have a higher than average rate of mapping errors. In addition, 
the genome is also rich in other types of repetitive structures, such as recently 
duplicated regions, paralogous genes, and pseudo-genes, which will also have 
elevated rates of mapping errors. A further challenge in this respect, is that 7.3% of 
the human genome is still not assembled and therefore represented as gaps in the 
reference. Reads from repetitive regions within assembly gaps that have homologs 
elsewhere are likely to be mis-aligned. This effect can be especially large for repeat 
families that are mostly found in assembly gaps with only a smaller fraction outside.  
 
A third source of nucleotide variation is alignment errors due to indels or structural 
difference between the reference genome and the genome being sequenced. A read 
from a region with a short indel, may map to the correct location, but since most 
genomic mapping methods, Sesam included, do not model gaps, part of the read will 
be wrongly aligned and give rise to a run of discrepancies. Similarly, structural 
variation, such as copy-number variation, can give rise to such alignment errors.  
 
The diploid model uses the reference genome as part of its input data. This has the 
effect that heterozygote calls, involving the reference genome nucleotide, are much 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 23
more probable than homozygote calls away from the reference. Especially at low 
coverage, this will create a bias toward heterozygote calls, which can be wrongly 
interpreted as evidence for nucleotide variation at a given site. Since the sex 
chromosomes are present in single copies, their overall coverage is about half that of 
the nuclear chromosomes and this effect will be more pronounced. 
 
Finally, contamination from modern humans may also contribute to sequence 
variation at a given site. Specifically, this may happen at polymorphic sites where the 
Saqqaq genome and the modern human differ. In this respect, chromosome X is more 
informative than chromosome Y, since contamination from both men and women will 
contribute chromosome X sequence and hence nucleotide variation at individual 
polymorphic sites. In contrast to the above described mapping errors, contamination 
will not be localised or biased toward certain regions, but should be uniformly 
represented along the genome. 
 
Even in the absence of contamination, it is inevitable to have some high-confidence 
heterozygote calls when genotyping a haploid chromosome with a diploid-genotyping 
model. This is exemplified by the sequencing of the Yanhuang genome (also male), 
which resulted in 8% heterozygous calls on chromosome X. Generally, contamination 
is not considered a problem in modern human genomes.  
 
When genotyping chromosome X of the Saqqaq genome with the diploid model, we 
found a total of 1783 high confidence SNPs. Of these, 76 are heterozogyte calls. 
Below we analyse the most likely cause for these and give some illustrative examples. 
 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 24
We find that 22 (29%) of the 76 heterozygote SNPs are located within 10 bases of 
indels and structural variation known to segregate in the human population (as 
defined in dbSNP version 130). Since these indel-and-structural-variation-proximal 
regions only compose 4.2% of chromosome X, we conclude that they are most likely 
the cause for these SNP calls. 
 
We then analysed the remaining SNPs with respect to the repetitive structure of the 
genome. 18 (33%) of the 54 remaining high confidence heterozygote SNPs (24% of 
all) were found in regions with extensive sequence homology to at least ten other 
regions in the genome, as defined by the self-chain track of the UCSC Genome 
Browser [25]. Overall, only 2.2% of chromosome X shows this level of homology to 
other regions. Again, we conclude that these heterozygote calls are most likely 
explained by the repetitive nature of these regions.  
 
Of the remaining 36 heterozogyte SNPs, 15 (42%; 20% of all) were found within 50 
bases of a neighboring SNP call (with respect to the full set of SNP calls). In 
comparison, only 99 (5.8%) of the 1707 high confidence homozygote calls were 
within 50 bases of a neighboring SNP. This shows that a large fraction of the 
remaining heterozygote calls are in regions with an unusual high SNP density, 
suggestive of additional un-annotated structural variation or repetitive regions with 
high incidence of mapping errors.  
 
Of the remaining 21 heterozogyte SNPs, 13 (62%; 17% of all) have some 
homologous regions around the genome (albeit less than ten). For comparison, in all 
of chromosome X, outside of repeats, only 9.0% show homology to other regions 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 25
(again based on the self-chain track of the UCSC Genome Browser). Some of these 
are in genes that are part of large gene families, with several homologous regions 
around the genome. Others have numerous homologous regions within chromosome 
X and appear to part of locally duplicated regions. Finally, some appear to be 
homologous to only a single other region in the genome. One representative example 
of this is a CT heterozygote SNP called at position 71,850,461, where the reference 
genome has a C (see Figure S12). This region is almost identical to a region on 
chromosome 1, probably due to a recent pseudo-gene insertion, where the 
corresponding position is a T. Wrongly mapped reads from this region thus explains 
the observed nucleotide variation at the site.  
 
Finally, six of the eight heterozygote SNPs with no annotated sequence homology to 
other regions of the genome, are located in short gaps (1-4 nucleotides) between 
annotated repeats of the same type or regions annotated to be of low complexity. 
(Note that SNPs overlapping repeats are not included in the high confidence set and 
that annotated repeats are also not included in the self-chains used to identify 
repetitive regions above). With little doubt, these heterozygote calls are thus also due 
to the repetitive structure of the genome. This leaves two heterozygote calls with no 
clear indication of cause. They could potentially be explained by contamination. 
However, they could also be explained by the presence of un-annotated repeats, 
homologous regions located in assembly gaps, structural variation, etc., in line with 
the other heterozygote calls categorised above. 
 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 26
Since the majority (74 of 76) of the high confidence heterozygote SNP calls can be 
referred to alignment and mapping errors, we conclude that their presence does not 
indicate contamination of the Saqqaq genome with modern day human DNA. 
 
The full set of SNP calls include calls based on low coverage and calls made in 
repeats. For both of these reasons we expect to see a high rate of (low-confidence) 
heterozygote SNP calls in this set. There are 48,057 SNPs in the full set and 18,102 
(38%) are heterozygotes, confirming this expectation. The majority of these 
heterozygote SNPs are located in repeats (96%), which is much higher than the 
fraction of homozygote calls located in repeats (62%), again showing that mapping 
errors are more common in repeats and that the repetitive structure of the genome is 
the main source for the heterozygote SNP calls in the haploid X chromosome. 
 
Genotyping the mitochondrial genome with the diploid model 
We also genotype the mitochondrial genome using the diploid genotyping model. In 
total 41 SNPs are called of which one is a heterozygote. However, it is located only 
four nucleotides from another (homozygote) SNP call and can be attributed to an 
indel in the Saqqaq mitochondrial genome relative to the reference. It therefore does 
not pass the quality filters for the high confidence set, which contain 38 homozygote 
SNP calls (one call overlaps a repeat and the last call also has a distance of four 
nucleotides to the nearest neighbour). Again, we find no evidence of contamination. 
 
Contamination estimated by private European allele frequency 
To estimate European contamination in the Saqqaq data, we used the HGDP genotype 
data to define a set of alleles that were private to Europeans. The Europeans were 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 27
defined as 135 individ- uals from France, Italy, Italy (Bergamo), Orkney Islands, and 
Russian Caucasus.To represent a population closely related to the Saqqaq individual, 
we chose individuals from Siberia, Cambodia, China and Japan. Only 70 individuals 
from China were chosen in order to match the same number of individuals as in the 
European sample. All SNPs with missing data or missing annotation were removed. 
We denote a set of 28,403 sites as having private European alleles, because these 
alleles were observed only in the European sample. Of these sites, we cover 25,597 
positions with a total of 392,470 read nucleotides from the Saqqaq individual. Of 
these, we observe the European allele in 1,286 cases (0.33%). The error rate for the 
reads was estimated based on the neighbouring positions to the private alleles. We 
extracted 5 positions on both sides (if covered) yielding a total of 2,700,147 read 
nucleotides. For each position, the fraction of nucleotides that deviate from the 
reference is calculated, giving a total error estimate of 0.35%. Since this error can be 
in three directions relative to the reference, the probability of seeing the particular 
private allele by chance is 0.12% on average. 
In order to quantify the contamination rate in the Saqqaq individual we use the 
following model for the probability of observing a private allele O given an error rate 
F: 
€ 
p OF( ) = p OF,EU( )p EU( ) + p OF,AS( )p AS( )
= p O EU,true( )p EU( ) 1− F( ) + p O EU,error( )p EU( )F
p OAS,true( )p AS( ) 1− F( ) + p O AS,error( )p AS( )F,
 
where p(EU) is the probability of an allele being European (contamination rate), 
p(AS) the probability of an allele being Asian (1-contamination rate), true meaning 
that no error on the read has occurred, and error meaning that an error occurred on the 
read (only errors between the two possible alleles are included). 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 28
Due to the SNP ascertainment, the allele frequencies in the population are hard to 
estimate without bias. Therefore, we estimate the expected number of private alleles 
using subsampling. In the procedure, we select the sites with private alleles after 
excluding a single individual and then obtain an estimate of the number of private 
alleles by the number of observed private alleles in the excluded individual. We 
perform this for every individual, and our final estimate is the average over all 
individuals. Thus an unbiased estimate of the fraction of private alleles based on the 
observed number of private alleles in the whole sample Oj for site j can be written as: 
€ 
p O EU,true( ) =
Oj 1− Iunique j( )( )j=1
M
∑
NM − 2Iunique j( )j=1
M
∑
, 
where Iunique is the indicator function which returns 1 if the private allele is unique to 
one individual, and zero otherwise. 
Because we denote alleles as private if they are only observed in one population of 
our finite sample, some of the alleles are not really private in the full population. 
Therefore, we still expect so observe some alleles in one population that are denoted 
as private for the other population in our sample even without contamination. We also 
estimate this fraction, p(O|AS,true), using subsampling where we denote the private 
alleles after excluding a single individual. We then estimate the fraction of sites where 
we expect to find a private allele from the observed number in the sample that was 
excluded. This gives us an estimate for each individual. Because some of the Asian 
individuals in our sample show a significant portion of admixture, the estimate will be 
inflated. Therefore we use the median of the estimate for the individuals instead of the 
mean because this will be more robust in the presence of outliers. 
We estimate standard error using a blocked jackknife procedure. The alleles across 
the genome will be correlated due to linkage disequilibrium. Therefore we bin the 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 29
genome in 5Mb large regions and estimate the standard errors using bootstrap where 
for each bootstrap one of the blocks is removed from the analysis. We chose a bin size 
of 5Mb as the LD does not extend this far and because this is what is recommended in 
Reich et al. [27].  
 
Using the error estimate of 0.12% in the model described above, we get an expected 
contamination of 0.85% ± 0.21% (Table S6). To get around possible issues with 
noise, we also introduced a quality cutoff on the reads where we disregard all 
nucleotides with an error rate of 0.33% or worse. This only changes the results 
slightly. Of the 344,819 read nucleotides above the cutoff, we observe the European 
allele in 888 cases. The error estimate is based on 2,329,850 read nucleotides yielding 
a total error rate of 0.0886%, or 0.0295% when correcting for the three possible 
errors. Using this approach, the estimated level of contamination is 1.1% +/- 0.21% 
comparable to the result above. It is also important to note that even a level of 
contamination around 1% at the sequence level results in a much lower level of 
contamination at the genotyping level, and therefore this potential source of error will 
not affect our SNP calls. This is also seen on the genotype level on the high 
confidence SNPs as seen in Table S7. 
 
It should be noted that this contamination estimate ignores many factors that would 
influence the result: For instance, some of the individuals in our Asian sample show 
signs of having European admixture (see plot in main text), which will bias our 
estimate of the contamination. Also, using this Asian sample as a proxy for the 
ancestral Saqqaq population and ignoring errors in the SNP chip data will affect the 
results. The error rate is calculated from the total number of discrepancies from the 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 30
reference and does not take transitions/transversion into account. Since both SNPs 
and read errors are mainly due to transitions, we underestimate the background 
chance of observing the European allele by ignoring this in the error rate. We also 
treat all positions identically in the error estimate, although the error rate will be 
higher in repeats. The standard errors here are based on a fixed error rate and a fixed 
estimate of the fraction of private European alleles in the Saqqaq individual. Thus we 
do not take into account the uncertainty in these estimates, which makes the standard 
errors a little to narrow. 
 
Y chromosome based demography 
We found 4,024 positions at which Saqqaq sequence differed from the reference 
sequence, 243 of these in the high confidence subset. For majority of these positions 
there is no information available in Y-chromosome consortium SNP database and 
these are likely to include primarily private or low frequency mutations, and changes 
due to DNA damage and/or sequencing errors. Out of the 590 informative Y 
chromosome SNPs (as defined by the Y chromosome consortium), which have been 
positioned on the phylogenetic tree of Y chromosome haplogroups so far [22] there 
are 398 which come from non-repetitive regions. For 219 of these our quality criteria 
were met and the nucleotide status was ascertained for the Saqqaq sample (Table S8). 
In 211 positions the Saqqaq sample shares the genotype with the reference, which 
belongs to haplogroup R1b for most of the Y chromosome sequence. At 8 positions 
the genotype was different, including 6 SNPs that define haplogroup R. Combined 
with the derived status at 8 haplogroup P defining positions, plus the ancestral status 
that Saqqaq and the reference share at the remaining 203 loci, this evidence shows 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 31
that the Saqqaq sequence can be unambiguously assigned to a single source of Y 
chromosome haplogroup P (Fig. 3d).  
 
Among the extant human populations, almost all haplogroup P chromosomes belong 
either to haplogroup R or Q, the latter being also one of the two most common Y 
chromosome haplogroups among Northeast Siberians [28], Aleut Islanders [29], 
North American Athapaskan speakers [30] and among modern Greenland Inuits [31]. 
According to the current YCC nomenclature the Northeast Siberian and North 
American haplogroup Q lineages fall further into Q1(a)* and Q1a3 subclades of this 
haplogroup [22]. However, none of the basal haplogroup Q defining sites were 
mapped while the Saqqaq sequence appeared to have the ancestral state at markers 
M346 and M3 that are derived in approximately one third of haplogroup Q1a3 
lineages among modern Inuits. Scanning of the raw data outside the high confidence 
subset, however, revealed that the haplogroup Q defining position M242 had been 
ascertained as T, which is the derived state, in three reads. Given these data, the 
Saqqaq sequence most likely belongs to haplogroup Q, but the sequencing data were 
not sufficient to (a) confirm its derived status in this haplogroup, and (b) to specify 
more accurately the sub-clade in haplogroup Q to which the ancient DNA specimen 
would belong.  
 
To confirm and specify the phylogenetic assignment of the Saqqaq Y chromosome we 
further tested, through conventional methods involving PCR and cloning, five Y 
chromosome markers: MEH2, M346, M3, M216, and M242. Through these analyses 
the derived status at M242 was indeed confirmed, and we were able to further specify 
the phylogenetic affiliation of the Saqqaq Y chromosome in haplogroup Q1a by the 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 32
derived state at marker MEH2 (Fig. 3d). Overall, the combined use of Illumina and 
conventional PCR/cloning based sequencing showed that all Y chromosome reads 
from the Saqqaq sample could be explained as deriving from a single male individual 
of haplogroup Q1a affiliation. In case of two markers – P240 and P257 – the 
difference between the Saqqaq individual and the reference sequence appeared to be 
due to the chimaeric nature of the reference sequence rather than because of possible 
contamination or ascertainment problems with the Saqqaq sample. 
 
The fact that the Saqqaq sample belongs to haplogroup Q1a is not surprising 
considering the wide geographic distribution of haplogroup Q lineages among extant 
populations in this region. Because modern Inuits, Aleutians, Native Americans and 
various Siberian populations all carry Q1a lineages at moderate to high frequencies it 
makes this high resolution Y chromosome evidence from the ancient Saqqaq sample – 
as it currently stands – non-informative for questions addressing the origins of palaeo 
and neoeskimos, and more particularly, about the continuity between the two. 
However, this ambiguity is mainly due to the lack of high resolution Y chromosome 
SNP data for extant populations. The newly revealed 4,024 markers potentially 
include a number of phylogenetically informative markers that, when future 
additional Y chromosome-wide sequence data will becomes available for extant 
populations, can reveal with higher accuracy the phylogenetic affiliation of the 
paternal ancestry of the Saqqaq individual. 
 
PCA analysis  
We included two datasets in the principal component analysis (PCA) analysis: The 
Stanford Human Genome Diversity Project SNP Genotyping Data 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 33
(http://hagsc.org/hgdp/files.html) and genotype data from 16 additional populations. 
Both datasets were genotyped on Illumina 650K arrays. 
 
Using the high confidence dataset from the Saqqaq genome, we selected all sites that 
overlapped with the Illumina SNPs with the exception of two sites, which had alleles 
that were inconsistent with the annotation in dbSNP 126. After merging the Saqqaq 
data with the SNP chip data we removed all non-autosomal SNPs, all SNPS with a 
minor allele frequency of less than 0.05 and all SNPs with missing data. We then 
performed the PCA analysis using the method described in Patterson et al. [32] 
(Eigensoft), which we implemented in the statistical language R. We used different 
subsets of the populations in the analysis. The eigenvectors were ordered according to 
the rank of the eigenvalues i.e. the first principal component has the largest 
corresponding eigenvalue. 
 
Estimation of inbreeding 
Inbreeding, i.e. identity by descent (IBD) sharing between the two chromosome 
copies of an individual, is usually not an observable quantity. But it can be inferred 
from genetic data. For example if we have genotype information from an individual 
and the frequency of the genotypes in the population we can estimate the amount of 
IBD sharing within the individual by writing up the probability of the data as the 
following sum over the hidden IBD state, X, of the different markers 
	  	   	   	   	   	   	   	   (1) 
 
where m is the number of loci, G={G1,G2,...,Gm} are the observed genotypes with Gi 
∈{AA,Aa,aa}, X indicates whether or not the two chromosomes are shared IBD in 
locus i, and the inbreeding coefficient F is the probability of being IBD at a random 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 34
locus (p(x)). The probabilities of the genotypes given the IBD state are here the 
probabilities of the alleles i.e. P(AA|X=0)=pA2, P(AA|X=1)= pA, P(Aa|X=0)=2pApa, 
P(Aa|X=1)=0, P(aa|X=0)= pa2 and P(aa|X=1)=pa. The probabilities of the alleles, pA 
and pa, at each locus i are usually obtained from the frequency of the alleles in a 
sample. If the markers are located far from each other they will be conditionally 
independent the expression in equation (1) is a proper likelihood function, and a 
maximum likelihood estimate of F can be obtained. Given a dense data set, where the 
markers are not independent, the equation can be seen as a composite likelihood 
function and will still be a consistent estimator. However, significance testing based 
on likelihood ratios using standard asymptotic theory is no longer possible [33].  
 
For the Saqqaq genome, as for many other re-sequenced genomes based on Next-
Generation sequencing, it is more difficult to call heterozygous than homozygous 
genotypes. Thus there will be an under-calling of heterozygotes, which will bias the 
above calculation. However, by removing the sites that are heterozygous in the 
Saqqaq individual we can still estimate the inbreeding using a modified approach. In 
this new modified approach we have: 
€ 
P(Gi /Gi ≠ Aa,F) = P(Gi
x= 0
1
∑ |Gi ≠ Aa,X = x)P(X = x |Gi ≠ Aa,F)  
and the composite likelihood function becomes 
€ 
P(G /G ≠ Aa,F) = P(Gi |Gi ≠ Aa,X
x=0
1
∑
i=1
m
∏ = x)P(X = x |Gi ≠ Aa,F) 
 
The probabilities for observing the genotypes conditionally on observing only 
homozygous genotypes and on the IBD state X can be seen in Table S9. And the 
probability of the IBD state in locus i is
	  
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 35
€ 
P(X = x |Gi ≠ Aa,F) =
P(X = x,Gi ≠ Aa |F)
P(Gi ≠ Aa |F)
=
P(X = x |F)P(Gi ≠ Aa | X = x)
P(Gi ≠ Aa | X = 0)(1− F) + F 	  
 
where the probability of being homozygous, P(Gi≠Aa |X=0), is estimated from the 
allele frequencies assuming Hardy Weinberg equilibrium in the reference population 
and the probability of being inbred P(X=1|F)=F and not being inbreed P(X=0|F)=1-
F. Using this composite likelihood function F can be estimated using the maximum 
likelihood approach. It might be counterintuitive that there is any information is left 
about IBD when all heterozygous sites are removed. However, some information is 
indeed left as can be seen in table S9 the probabilities of observing the homozygote 
genotypes differ depending on whether or not the individual is inbred and this 
difference increases with the rarity of the observed alleles. 
The intuition behind this is that if the individual is not inbred then the allele that the 
individual is homozygous for in a given locus has to be sampled twice by chance for 
the observation to occur whereas if the individual is inbred it only has to be sampled 
once since the two alleles have to have the same type when the individual is inbred. 
The probability difference between these two scenarios is not high when the allele is 
very common – since sampling a very common allele twice is not much more unlikely 
than sampling it once. However, if the allele is very rare the difference is substantial – 
as sampling a rare allele twice is much less likely than sampling it once. We estimate 
standard error using a block jackknife approach as described previously in the 
contamination estimation section (also SI). 
 
The above inbreeding estimation method assumes that the allele frequencies from the 
population the Saqqaq individual belonged to are known. However, we do not know 
these allele frequencies. Instead we estimate the allele frequencies from the Siberian 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 36
population. The resulting estimate of inbreeding can therefore not be interpreted as 
the inbreeding coefficient in any strict sense, but instead constitutes a measure of both 
the inbreeding in the Saqqaq genome and the variation that is explained by differences 
between the Saqqaq individual and the reference population. Unfortunately it is not 
possible to quantify how much each of these two constituents contributes with to the 
total estimate.  
 
Estimation of inbreeding across the genome 
Using the conditional probabilities the above approach can also be used in a hidden 
Markov model (HMM) framework as described in [34]. This will provide the 
probability of being inbred along the genome (Fig. S13). Besides giving us 
information about where in the genome Saqqaq is inbred, this approach has the 
advantage that it takes into account the varying distance between the markers and the 
length distribution of IBD tracts. 
We condition on there being no heterozygous loci and use the emission probabilities 
from Table S9. The transition probabilities described in [34], see Table S10, will still 
hold for dense genotype data sets, and can be considered an approximation for less 
dense SNP data sets. Density is here relative to the recombination breakpoints 
occurring in the pedigree along the edges of cycles relating the individual to its 
ancestors. As the method assumes no LD between markers, we removed strong LD in 
the data. This was done by estimating the squared correlation coefficient (r2) between 
pairs of markers in the sample consisting of the Saqqaq and the Siberian population. 
We performed the estimation in a 50 SNP sliding window so that pairwise LD for a 
single SNP was estimated for 49 SNPs on either sides. Then the SNPs were iteratively 
removed if they showed an r2>0.5 with any of the adjacent SNPs. Genotyping errors 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 37
are accounted for by assuming a fixed error rate of 0.01, using an approach described 
in [35].  
Even though the method only uses the homozygous sites the tracts we have inferred 
coincide with the regions where we do not observe heterozygous genotypes (see fig. 
S13 for the inferred tracts, and fig. S14 for a map of heterozygous sites). This would 
only happen if the tracts correctly inferred and are truly IBD.  
 
In the Saqqaq genome we observe multiple long IBD tracts (>10Mb) that are far 
longer than the extent of LD. Thus these tracts cannot be explained by local variation 
in population differences between the Saqqaq population and the Siberian population 
but instead show that the runs of homozygosity observed in the Saqqaq individuals is 
due to inbreeding. 
 
Estimation of divergence times 
The estimation of divergence times is complicated by several issues, the two most 
important being uncertainty in genotype calls, especially a potential for under-calling 
homozygotes, and the ascertainment bias [36,37] observed in the SNP genotyping 
data analysed from the reference populations (see Ancestry Analyses section SI for a 
description of these data). To take these biases into account our method only uses one 
allele from the Saqqaq genome and conditions on the observed allele frequency 
spectrum in the reference population. We use a modification of the method of Nielsen 
et al. [38]. This method estimates divergence times between pairs of populations 
assuming all variants arose before the divergence of the populations. As the SNPs 
analysed here all are SNPs that have been ascertained in a global population, 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 38
primarily based on Europeans and Africans, it is highly unlikely that SNPs in our data 
set are specific to the Saqqaq or the population we compare the Saqqaq to.  
 
The method is modified in two ways from its original version. First, we assume that 
the distribution of allele frequencies in the ancestor follows the familiar 1/x 
distribution arising in equilibrium under a standard coalescence model with mutations 
occurring according to an infinite sites model. Secondly, we base all inferences on the 
conditional distribution to avoid the effect of ascertainment biases and to increase 
robustness towards parametric assumptions affecting the site frequency spectrum. Let 
y be the allele observed in the Saqqaq individual (by randomly sampling one of the 
alleles in a site), and let x = (x1, x2, …, x2n) be the site frequency spectrum in the 
population to which the Saqqaq is being compared. Then we calculate the likelihood 
function for the population size scaled divergence time, t, as 
 
€ 
L(t)∝ p(y | t,x) = p(y,x | t)
p(x | t)
,        (2) 
 
and optimise this likelihood function numerically to obtain maximum likelihood 
estimates. We likewise obtain confidence intervals (CIs) using standard asymptotic 
theory, i.e. we construct a 95% CI by finding the value of t that would reduce the 
likelihood by 1.96 log likelihood units from the maximum value. Both the 
denominator and numerator in Eq. 2 are calculated as in Nielsen et al. [38], but with 
the mentioned modification regarding assumptions of distributions of allele 
frequencies at split times. 
 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 39
Using complete mitochondrial genomes of Chukchi (n=6) [39], Bayesian estimates of 
Ne were obtained with Beast v1.5.2 [40]. The substitution model HKY was chosen by 
the likelihood ratio test in Modeltest v3.7 [41]. For the molecular clock, we used a 
normal distributed clock rate prior with 95% highest posterior densities of 7.35x10-8 - 
1.16x10-7, based on the range estimated in a study by Endicott & Ho [42]. All other 
parameters were given uniform distributions. A strict molecular clock was applied 
with the constant size demographic model. The MCMC chains were run with 107 
iterations and trees were sampled every 103 iterations. The first 10% of iterations 
were discarded as burn-in. Log-files were analysed in Tracer v1.4.1 [40], and 
effective sample sizes were used to evaluate convergence. We obtained an effective 
population size estimate of roughly 350 individuals (95% Credible Interval: 293-810). 
A mtDNA effective population size of 350 corresponds to an effective diploid 
population size of 2Ne = 1,400 (95% Credible Interval: 1172-3240). 
 
The estimates obtained are scaled in terms of the effective population size of the 
population to which the Saqqaq is compared. We note that because we only use a 
single Saqqaq allele, our estimates are not functions of the effective population size of 
the Saqqaq population. The estimates obtained are shown in Table S11. 
 
Ancestry analyses 
A number of algorithms that aim to capture the genetic structure in large multilocus 
genotyping datasets have been introduced in recent years. They can be grouped under 
common nominator as structure-like analyses [43] owing to the first widely used 
ready-made program called structure [44,45]. These type of analyses construct a 
specified-by-the-researcher number (K) of ancestral populations, as defined by allele 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 40
frequencies at all studied loci, and simultaneously assign ancestry proportions 
(probabilities) to each individual in the study. A given individual may contain 
ancestry signal from one or more ancestral populations. The latter could be interpreted 
as admixture between two or more source populations. However, the term “ancestry 
(proportions)”, used in this context, should not be interpreted as reflecting direct 
phylogeny. The model of genetic admixture between a chosen number of hypothetical 
“pure ancestral populations” – K - employed in the structure-like programs, is 
understandably simplified as far as demographic histories of real populations are 
concerned and per se do not allow to discriminate between: i) similarity due to co-
ancestry or recent admixture, and ii) dissimilarity due to ancient split or intense drift. 
However, keeping that in mind, one can make reasonable use of the programs to 
reveal empirical structure within the data [43]. 
 
The original algorithms used Bayesian approach [44,45] but more recently likelihood-
based methods [46-49] have gained foothold partly because of advantages in 
computational speed allowing the usage of bigger datasets produced particularly with 
the commercial genotyping chips (Illumina, Affymetrics). Of the maximum likelihood 
methods we chose a recently introduced approach assembled into program 
ADMIXTURE [49]. This algorithm is faster and, due to more stringent convergence 
criterion, more accurate, than alternatives like Frappe used in Li et al. [50]. 
 
We used the same dataset of 492 reference samples from 35 extant Asian and 
American populations as for the PC analyses (see Table S12). We used PLINK 1.05 
[51] to perform data management and quality control operations. Altogether 95,502 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 41
SNPs were found in common between the different versions of the Illumina 660K or 
610K genotyping chips and the Saqqaq genome high confidence SNPs.  
 
We explored K values from 2 to 10 running Admixture 100 times at each K and 
assessed convergence by studying the Log-likelihood scores (LLs). We note that for 
all values of K, the maximum difference of LLs within the fraction of runs (5) 
yielding the highest LLs, was minimal (up to 0.14 LL units). Though not definitive, 
this observation is indicative that convergence was reached for all values of K tested. 
Plots for each K is shown in Figure S15. In further analyses we chose to concentrate 
on K = 5 because the ancestry components appearing at higher values of K were 
predominantly restricted to a single population and as such less informative. 
 
Comparative human genome data  
The human reference genome, build 36.3 was downloaded 
(ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/H_sapiens/ARCHIVE/BUILD.36.3/Assembled_chro
mosomes). The Korean [52] genome data was retrieved from KOBIC 
(ftp://ftp.kobic.kr). The Asian genome [24] data was retrieved from the YanHuang 
database (http://yh.genomics.org.cn). The Venter genome [53] data was retrieved 
from the J. Craig Venter Institute (http://huref.jcvi.org). The SNP set from the Watson 
genome [54] was retrieved from Baylor College of Medicine (http://www.bcm.edu). 
The Yoruban genome [55] sequence was retrieved from the Illumina web site 
(http://www.illumina.com/iGenome). The Chimpanzee genome [56] was retrieved 
from NCBI (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Pan_troglodytes). The sequences for the 
human microbiome related bacteria were retrieved from NCBI – the Human 
Microbiome Project (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/HUMAN_MICROBIOM). 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 42
	  
Metagenomic analysis of the sequence reads  
To estimate the species composition of the metagenomic DNA extracted from the 
Saqqaq hair, we employed a “chain-mapping” method based on Bowtie [57] and 
BLAST [58] where reads enter a mapping pipeline with a defined set of reference 
organisms. Reads which cannot be aligned to a reference organism during one 
mapping round get passed on to the next species level where again the non-mapped 
reads are further passed on. The mapping chain used in this project had the following 
taxonomic order, only reads not mapped by Sesam initially were processed: 1) Human 
Reference Genome (Build 36.3), 2) Human sequences with unknown location, 3) 
Chimpanzee genome, 4) NCBI completed microbial genomes 5)Human microbiome, 
6) GenBank non-redundant nucleotide database. 
 
First, reads that were not mapped by Sesam, were aligned against the human reference 
genome using Bowtie with the options “-n 2 -e 70 -l 34 -m 1 –best --strata” and 
reporting both aligned, unaligned and alignments with more than one reportable 
alignment. Reads that could not be mapped against the reference genome were 
subsequently mapped against the unknown human sequences followed by mapping of 
the new unmapped reads against the Chimpanzee genome. Reads that did not align 
against any of these primate databases were mapped against the NCBI set of 
completed microbial genomes and any overrepresented microbes were assembled 
individually. After mapping to bacteria associated with the human microflora, the rest 
of all sequence reads that have not been aligned were compared to the GenBank non-
redundant database using blastall [58]. Results are shown in Table S13 and visualised 
in Fig 2b. 
 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 43
Functional SNP assessment 
SNPs shown to be associated with various phenotypes were curated from literature 
and HGMD [59] professional release 2009.2. Only SNPs for which experimental 
evidence was available for association were included, however, not all SNPs were 
shown to be causative. SNPs with multiple validations were preferred. SNP 
consequence on gene models was determined using the Ensembl [60] v. 54 API. Gene 
ontology associations were obtained from Biomart-Ensembl v. 54 [61]. All SNPs are 
summarised with rs number and posterior probability in Table S14. 
Several findings can possibly be interpreted in favour of adaptations to the cold Arctic 
climate: The Saqqaq non-synonymous homozygous variant (C/C) change in TP53 on 
chromosome 17 suggests he possessed the more active form of p53 (Arg variant), 
which is proposed to protect against winter temperature stress through efficient 
regulation of metabolism [62]. Furthermore, a panel of genes involved in metabolic 
syndrome, as well as close interaction partners have recently been genotyped to study 
association with cold and heat stress [63]. Of the 34 SNPs associated with high 
significance to cold adaptation, the Saqqaq genome shows the non-reference allele for 
12 including non-synonymous mutations in EPHX2, the leptin receptor LEPR, and 
T55A in FABP2 that are part of the thermogenesis pathway [64] or intracellular 
metabolism and transport of long-chain fatty acids [63]. For the latter, the Saqqaq 
allele type (C/C) increases strongly in population frequency with latitude [63] and is 
believed to protect against cold temperatures by increasing BMI and increasing the 
fuel for heat production [65]. Additionally, on chromosome 1, 7, and 11 we find non-
synonymous changes which affect proteins connected to vasoconstriction (Gene 
Ontology - a common mechanism to reduce heat loss), higher percentage fat mass, 
and increased body mass index [66,67].  
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 44
 
Disease risk was investigated in a simplistic fashion by assessing the number of 
known disease risk SNPs affected in the Saqqaq genome. This analysis is similar to 
what has been reported earlier [24], but with a larger phenotype list. The phenotypes 
studied were Alcohol Tolerance, Alcoholism, Nicotine Dependence, Hypertension, 
Parkinson's, Alzheimer's, Hypolactasia, Diabetes and Obesity. Results are shown in 
Fig. S16 and indicate an overall disease risk that is close to the Korean individual. 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 45
Supplementary References 
[1] Meldgaard, M. Ancient Harp Seal Hunters of Disko Bay. Subsistence and 
Settlement at the Saqqaq Culture Site Qeqertasussuk (2400 – 1400 BC), West 
Greenland. Meddelelser om Grønland, Man & Society (Danish Polar Center, 
Copenhagen 2004). 
[2] Gilbert, M. T. P. et al. Paleo-eskimo mtDNA genome reveals matrilineal 
discontinuity in greenland. Science 320, 1787–9 (2008). 
[3] Meldgaard, J. Nationalmuseets Arbejdsmark, 83 – 96 (1983). 
[4] Grønnow, B. in Threads of Arctic Prehistory: Papers in Honour of William E. 
Taylor Jr., edited by Morrison, D., Pilon, J.L. Canadian Museum of 
Civilization, Mercury Series. Archaeological Survey of Canada Paper 149: 
197 – 238. (1994) 
[5] Brunner, H. and Coman, K. The Identification of Mammalian Hair. Inkata 
Press, Melbourne, Australia, (1974). 
[6] DeGaetano, D.H. et al. Fungal Tunneling of Hair from a Buried Body. JFSCA 
31, (4), 1048- 1054, (1992). 
[7] Wilson, A.S. et al. Yesterday’s hair-human hair in archaeology. Biologist, 48, 
(5), 213-217, (2001) 
[8] Ramsey, C. B. et al. Improvements to the pre-treatment of bone at Oxford. 
Radiocarbon 46 155-63 (2004). 
[9] Brown, T.A. et al. Improved collagen extraction by modified Longin method. 
Radiocarbon 30, 171-177 (1988). 
[10] O’Connell, T.C. and Hedges, R.E.M. Isotopic comparison of hair and bone: 
Archaeological analyses. J. Archaeol. Sci. 26, 661-665 (1999). 
[11] Ramsey, C. B. and Hedges, R.E.M. Hybrid ion sources: Radiocarbon 
measurements from microgram to milligram. Nuclear Instruments and 
Methods in Physics Research B 123, 539-545 (1997). 
[12] Reimer, P.J and Reimer, R.W. A marine reservoir correction database and on-
line interface. Radiocarbon 43, 461-3 (2001). 
[13] Krog H. and Tauber H. C-14 chronology of late- and post-glacial marine 
deposits in north Jutland. Danmarks geologiske Undersøgelse, Årbog 1973, 
93-105 (1974). 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 46
[14] Tauber, H. 14C Activity of Arctic Marine Animals. In: Radiocarbon Dating: 
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference, edited by Berger, R. and 
Seuss, H.E. University of California Press, Berkeley, 447-452 (1979). 
[15] Olsson, I. U. Content of 14C in marine mammals from northern Europe. 
Radiocarbon 22, 662-675 (1980). 
[16] McNeely R. et al. Canadian marine reservoir ages, preliminary data 
assessment, Open File 5049, pp. 3. Geological Survey Canada (2006). 
[17] Wilson A. S. et al. Stable isotope and DNA evidence for ritual sequences in 
Inca child sacrifice. P. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104, 16456-16461 (2007). 
[18] Buchardt B. et al. Fingernails and diet: Stable isotope signatures of a marine 
hunting community from modem Uummannaq, North Greenland. Chem. Geol. 
244, 316-329 (2007). 
[19] Coltrain J. B. et al. Sealing, whaling and caribou: the skeletal isotope 
chemistry of Eastern Arctic foragers. J. Archaeol. Sci. 31, 39-57 (2004). 
[20] Gilbert, M. T. P. et al. Whole-genome shotgun sequencing of mitochondria 
from ancient hair shafts. Science 317, 1927–30 (2007). 
[21] Edgar, RC. MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and 
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res. 32, 1792-97 (2004). 
[22] Karafet, T. M. et al. High levels of Y-chromosome differentiation among 
native siberian populations and the genetic signature of a boreal hunter-
gatherer way of life. Hum Biol 74, 761–89 (2002). 
[23] Becksette M. et al. Fast index based algorithms and software for matching 
position specific scoring matrices. BMC Bioinf. 7, 389-413 (2006). 
[24] Wang, J. et al. The diploid genome sequence of an Asian individual. Nature 
456, 60–5 (2008). 
[25] Rhead B. et al. The UCSC genome browser database: update 2010. Nucleic 
Acids Res, doi:10.1093/nar/gkp939 (2009) 
[26] Skaletsky, H. et al. The male-specific region of the human Y chromosome is a 
mosaic of discrete sequence classes. Nature 423, 825–37 (2003). 
[27] Reich, D. et al. Reconstructing Indian population history. Nature 461, 489-494 
(2009). 
[28] Karafet T. et al. New binary polymorphisms reshape and increase resolution 
of the human Y chromosomal haplogroup tree. Genome Res 18, 830-8 (2008). 
[29] Zlojutro, M. et al. Mitochondrial DNA and Y-chromosome variation in five 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 47
eastern Aleut communities: evidence for genetic substructure in the Aleut 
population. Ann Hum Biol 36, 511–26 (2009). 
[30] Malhi, R. S. et al. Distribution of Y chromosomes among native north 
americans: a study of Athapaskan population history. Am J Phys Anthropol 
137, 412–24 (2008). 
[31] Bosch, E. et al. High level of male-biased Scandinavian admixture in 
greenlandic inuit shown by Y-chromosomal analysis. Hum Genet 112, 353–63 
(2003). 
[32] Patterson N. et al. Population Structure and Eigenanalysis. PLoS Genet 2, 
e190 (2006). 
[33] Lindsay, B. Composite likelihood methods. In: Statistical Inference from 
Stochastic Processes, edited by Prabhu, N.U. American Mathematical Society, 
Contemporary Mathematics, 80, 221–239 (1988). 
[34] Leutenegger, A. L. et al. Estimation of the inbreeding coefficient through use 
of genomic data. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 73, 516–523 (2003). 
[35] Albrechtsen, A. et al. Relatedness mapping and tracts of relatedness for 
genome-wide data in the presence of linkage disequilibrium. Genet. 
Epidemiol. 33, 266–274 (2009). 
[36] Nielsen, R. Estimation of Population Parameters and Recombination Rates 
using Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms. Genetics 154, 931-942 (2000). 
[37] Clark, A. G. et al. Ascertainment bias in studies of human genome-wide 
polymorphism. Genome Res. 15, 1496-1502 (2005). 
[38] Nielsen, R. et al. Maximum-Likelihood Estimation of Population Divergence 
Times and Population Phylogeny in Models without Mutation. Evolution 52, 
669-677 (1998). 
[39] Derenko, M. et al. Phylogeographic analysis of mitochondrial DNA in 
northern Asian populations. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 81, 1025-41 (2007). 
[40] Drummond, A.J. and Rambaut, A. BEAST: Bayesian evolutionary analysis by 
sampling trees. BMC Evol. Bio. 7, 214-21 (2007). 
[41] Posada, D. and Crandall, K. A. MODELTEST: testing the model of DNA 
substitution. Bioinf. 14, 817-8 (1998). 
[42] Endicott, P. and Ho, S.Y.W. A Bayesian evaluation of human mitochondrial 
substitution rates. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 82, 895-902 (2008). 
[43] Weiss, K. M. and Long, J. C. Non-Darwinian estimation: my ancestors, my 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 48
genes' ancestors. Genome Res 19, 703-10 (2009). 
[44] Pritchard, J. K. et al. Inference of population structure using multilocus 
genotype data. Genetics 155, 945-59 (2000). 
[45] Falush, D. et al. Inference of Population Structure Using Multilocus Genotype 
Data: Linked Loci and Correlated Allele Frequencies. Genetics 164, 1567-
1587 (2003). 
[46] Purcell, S. and Sham, P. Properties of structured association approaches to 
detecting population stratification. Hum Hered 58, 93-107 (2004). 
[47] Tang, H. et al. Estimation of individual admixture: analytical and study design 
considerations. Genet Epidemiol 28, 289-301 (2005). 
[48] Zhu, X. et al. A classical likelihood based approach for admixture mapping 
using EM algorithm. Hum Genet 120, 431-45 (2006). 
[49] Alexander, D. H. et al. Fast model-based estimation of ancestry in unrelated 
individuals. Genome Res 19, 1655-64 (2009). 
[50] Li, J. Z. et al. Worldwide human relationships inferred from genome-wide 
patterns of variation. Science 319, 1100-4 (2008). 
[51] Purcell, S. et al. PLINK: a tool set for whole-genome association and 
population-based linkage analyses. Am J Hum Genet 81, 559-75 (2007). 
[52] Ahn, S.-M. et al. The first Korean genome sequence and analysis: full genome 
sequencing for a socio-ethnic group. Genome Res 19, 1622–9 (2009). 
[53] Levy, S. et al. The diploid genome sequence of an individual human. PLoS 
Biol 5, e254 (2007). 
[54] Wheeler, D. A. et al. The complete genome of an individual by massively 
parallel DNA sequencing. Nature 452, 872–6 (2008). 
[55] Bentley, D. R. et al. Accurate whole human genome sequencing using 
reversible terminator chemistry. Nature 456, 53–9 (2008). 
[56] Chimpanzee Sequencing and Analysis Consortium. Initial sequence of the 
chimpanzee genome and comparison with the human genome. Nature 437, 69-
87 (2005). 
[57] Langmead, B. et al. Ultrafast and memory-efficient alignment of short DNA 
sequences to the human genome. Genome Biology 10, R25 (2009). 
[58] Altschul, S. F. et al. Basic local alignment search tool. J. Mol. Biol. 215, 403-
410 (1990). 
[59] Stenson, P. et al. The Human Gene Mutation Database: 2008 update. Genome 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 49
Med. 1, 13 (2009). 
[60] Hubbard, T. J. P. et al. Ensembl 2009. Nucleic Acids Res. 37, D690-697 
(2009). 
[61] Smedley, D. et al. BioMart--biological queries made easy. BMC Genomics 10, 
22-33 (2009). 
[62] Hong, S. et al. Winter temperature and UV are tightly linked to genetic 
changes in the p53 tumor suppressor pathway in Eastern Asia. Am. J. Hum. 
Genet. 84, 534-41 (2009). 
[63] Hancock, A. et al. Adaptations to Climate in Candidate Genes for Common 
Metabolic Disorders. PLoS Genet. 4, e32 (2008). 
[64] Dulloo, A. G. et al. Leptin directly stimulates thermogenesis in skeletal 
muscle. FEBS Lett. 515, 109-13 (2002). 
[65] Baier, L. J. et al. An amino acid substitution in the human intestinal fatty acid 
binding protein is associated with increased fatty acid binding, increased fat 
oxidation, and insulin resistance. J. Clin. Invest. 95, 1281-7 (1995). 
[66] Zhao, L-J. et al. Polymorphisms of the tumor necrosis factor-alpha receptor 2 
gene are associated with obesity phenotypes among 405 Caucasian nuclear 
families. Hum Genet. 124, 171-7 (2008). 
[67] Shiri-Sverdlov, R. et al. Identification of TUB as a novel candidate gene 
influencing body weight in humans. Diabetes 55, 385-9 (2006). 
[68] Stuiver, M. and Polach, H.A. Discussion: Reporting of 14C data. Radiocarbon 
19, 355-63 (1977). 
[69] Reimer P. et al. IntCal04 terrestrial radiocarbon age calibration, 0-26 cal kyr 
BP. Radiocarbon 46, 1029-58 (2004). 
[70] Yamamoto, F. et al. Molecular genetic basis of the histo-blood group ABO 
system. Nature 345, 229-33 (1990). 
[71] Yamamoto, F. et al. Human histo-blood group A2 transferase coded by A2 
allele, one of the A subtypes, is characterized by a single base deletion in the 
coding sequence, which results in an additional domain at the carboxyl 
terminal. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 187, 366-74 (1992). 
[72] Iida, R. et al. Genotyping of five single nucleotide polymorphisms in the 
OCA2 and HERC2 genes associated with blue-brown eye color in the 
Japanese population. Cell Biochem Funct 27, 323–7 (2009). 
[73] Soejima, M., and Koda, Y. Population differences of two coding SNPs in 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 50
pigmentation-related genes SLC24A5 and SLC45A2. Int. J. Legal. Med. 121, 
36–9 (2007). 
[74] Prodi, D. A. et al. EDA2R is associated with androgenetic alopecia. J. Invest. 
Dermatol. 128, 2268–70 (2008). 
[75] Ellis, J. A. et al. Baldness and the androgen receptor: the AR polyglycine 
repeat polymorphism does not confer susceptibility to androgenetic alopecia. 
Hum. Genet. 121, 451–7 (2007). 
[76] Yoshiura, K. et al. A SNP in the ABCC11 gene is the determinant of human 
earwax type. Nat. Genet. 38, 324–30 (2006). 
[77] Sabeti, P. C. et al. Genome-wide detection and characterization of positive 
selection in human populations. Nature 449, 913–8 (2007). 
[78] Branicki, W. et al. Association of the SLC45A2 gene with physiological 
human hair colour variation. J. Hum. Genet. 53, 966–71 (2008). 
[79] Shi, H. et al. Winter temperature and UV are tightly linked to genetic changes 
in the p53 tumor suppressor pathway in Eastern Asia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 84, 
534-41 (2009). 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 51
Table S1. Radiocarbon determinations from the Qeqertasussuk site. Radiocarbon ages 
are expressed in years BP after Stuiver and Polach [68]. Stable isotope ratios are 
expressed in ‰ relative to vPDB and nitrogen to AIR. Mass spectrometric precision 
is ±0.2‰ for carbon and ±0.3‰ for nitrogen. Wt. used is the amount of bone 
pretreated and the yield represents the weight of gelatin or ultrafiltered gelatin in 
milligrams. %yield is the wt.%collagen which should not be <1wt.% at ORAU. This 
is the amount of collagen extracted as a percentage of the starting weight. %C is the 
carbon present in the combusted gelatin. CN is the atomic ratio of carbon to nitrogen. 
At ORAU, for bone collagen this is acceptable if it ranges between 2.9—3.5, for hair 
keratin the range is slightly wider (3.0-3.8).  
 
OxA Sample identification Material Species 
Radiocarbon 
age BP 
Wt. 
used Yield %Yld %C δ
13C δ15N CN 
18746 Qt 85 FC 85.0/251.0:4 bone 
R. 
tarandus 3505 ± 29 590 19.6 3.3 39.9 -19.4 1.3 3.4 
18747 
Qt 85 F8 
10.0/23.5: 76 
3287 
bone R. tarandus 3713 ± 28 474 40.2 8.5 42.7 -17.6 3.5 3.3 
18748 
Qt 85 FB 
10.0/23.5: 95 
5115 
bone R. tarandus 3664 ± 28 436 31.6 7.2 43.1 -17.6 2.8 3.3 
18749 Qt 86 PC 85/261: 11 bone 
R. 
tarandus 3628 ± 28 362 40.1 11.1 43.2 -18.0 0.1 3.3 
20656 Hair sample hair sapiens 4044 ± 31 25.8 21 81.2 45.3 -13.9 19.3 3.7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 52
Table S2. Calibrated ages BC from the Qeqertasussuk site. The results are calibrated 
against the INTCAL04 curve [69]. See SI text for details of reservoir correction.  
 
 
Calibrated age range BP (68.2% 
prob.) 
    From          To 
Calibrated age range BP (95.4% 
prob.) 
    From            To 
OxA-
18746 3833 3723 3860 3695 
OxA-
18747 4139 3989 4148 3979 
OxA-
18748 4079 3927 4085 3905 
OxA-
18749 3977 3901 4073 3854 
OxA-
20656 4035 3728 4170 3600 
 
 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 53
Table S3. Expected and measured carbon and nitrogen isotopic values of standards 
run alongside the samples at Oxford and Bradford. 
 
Standard Expected δ13C 
(‰) 
Measured δ13C 
(‰) 
Expected δ15N 
(‰) 
Measured δ15N 
(‰) 
Oxford -26.1 -26.4 -1.8 -1.7 
  -26.6  -1.8 
  -26.4  -1.6 
  -26.1  -2.0 
Bradford -27.8 -27.7 1.0 1.1 
  -27.5  1.1 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 54
Table S4. 4x4 error matrices. For each reaction a multiple alignment was generated 
(using MUSCLE v3.7, [21]), majority count identified correct base and all differences 
were counted to generate these matrices. Gaps and N’s are omitted from the table. 
 
HiFi tag 03 RT1HF (17871 sequences)   
 A C G T 
A 0.9976 0 0.0011 0 
C 0.0007 0.9901 0 0.0071 
G 0.0095 0 0.9875 0 
T 0.0001 0.0022 0 0.9971 
     
     
HiFi tag 04 RT2HF (6402 sequences)   
 A C G T 
A 0.9959 0.0002 0.0023 0.0003 
C 0.001 0.9531 0.0002 0.0352 
G 0.0259 0 0.9672 0.0003 
T 0.0004 0.0034 0 0.9951 
     
HiFi tag 05 WR1HF (5661 sequences)   
 A C G T 
A 0.9954 0.0003 0.0029 0.0006 
C 0.0005 0.9817 0.0006 0.0139 
G 0.0088 0 0.9896 0.0002 
T 0.0006 0.0032 0.0001 0.9955 
     
Phusion tag 09 RT1PH (12662 sequences)  
 A C G T 
A 0.999 0 0.0001 0.0001 
C 0.0003 0.9986 0 0.0007 
G 0.004 0 0.9948 0.0003 
T 0.0001 0.0023 0 0.9967 
     
Phusion tag 10 RT2PH (7279 sequences)  
 A C G T 
A 0.996 0.0003 0.0011 0.0013 
C 0.0017 0.9942 0 0.0022 
G 0.0028 0 0.9937 0.0012 
T 0.001 0.0037 0 0.9946 
     
Phusion tag 11 WR1PH (13281 sequences)  
 A C G T 
A 0.9987 0 0.0005 0.0002 
C 0.0008 0.9968 0.0002 0.0018 
G 0.0004 0 0.9994 0 
T 0.0002 0.0014 0 0.9983 
 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 55
Table S5. Summary Statistics. For each chromosome and the full genome, we 
calculate the coverage (percent of nucleotides covered), the average depth, and the 
number of high confidence SNPs. 
Chromosome Coverage 
Average 
depth All SNPs 
High-
confidence 
SNPs 
chr1 79.08% 21.58 178660 30707 
chr2 84.49% 18.86 174727 28795 
chr3 84.93% 17.13 138013 19536 
chr4 82.88% 15.29 145200 16548 
chr5 84.10% 17.15 120601 18104 
chr6 84.82% 17.57 127304 18367 
chr7 83.87% 19.88 129227 20214 
chr8 84.55% 18.52 109176 17060 
chr9 69.72% 21.18 96875 16057 
chr10 83.99% 21.59 120182 21479 
chr11 86.01% 21.61 111926 19235 
chr12 87.10% 19.74 103456 15184 
chr13 71.66% 16.05 75212 10646 
chr14 72.07% 19.97 68041 11067 
chr15 69.17% 21.71 66345 12651 
chr16 78.22% 28.18 86198 16008 
chr17 89.21% 30.65 69020 13387 
chr18 85.49% 18.56 59537 9992 
chr19 81.47% 37.34 62706 9923 
chr20 87.23% 26.70 56700 11126 
chr21 61.98% 22.69 34035 4785 
chr22 63.28% 34.55 38287 8927 
chrX 69.04% 8.97 34247 3071 
chrY 19.60% 12.13 4024 243 
mtDNA 94.07% 3,802.81 40 39 
Full genome 79.31% 19.94 2209739 353151 
 
 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 56
Table S6. Results of contamination analyses with standard errors. 
Variable Estimate Info 
F 0.0035/3 All reads 
F 0.000886/3 Quality cut off 
O 1286/392470 All reads 
O 888/344819 Quality cut off 
€ 
ˆ C  0.00846±0.0021 All reads 
€ 
ˆ C  0.011±0.0021 Quality cut off 
 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 57
Table S7. Observed private minor alleles. AA denotes a genotype with two of the 
major allele and aa a genotype with two minor alleles. The two first columns denote 
whether the minor allele exists in Asia or Europe respectively 
 
Exists in Asia Exists in Europe AA Aa aa 
No No 1096 0 1 
Yes No 1152 27 4 
No Yes 2341 0 0 
Yes No 76389 22202 10336 
 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 58
Table S8. SNPs overlapping with Y chromosome consortium (YCC) SNPs [22]. 
YCC SNP name, position on Y chromosome, Reference Allele, match or no match to 
reference (y/n), Saqqaq genotype determined, 1 – posterior probability, sequencing 
depth. 
 
SNP Position 
Reference 
allele match Saqqaq 1-pp Depth 
47z 3496441 G y GG 3.58E-108 38 
50f2(P) 21906454 C y CC 4.47E-18 5 
IMS-JST002611 7606725 G y GG 2.35E-47 17 
M103 20395525 C y CC 1.33E-34 11 
M105 20325878 C y CC 1.61E-15 4 
M108.2 20392322 T y TT 4.75E-24 7 
M110 20366484 T y TT 2.36E-21 6 
M12 7643479 G y GG 3.40E-26 8 
M123 20223973 C y CC 4.14E-21 6 
M127 20222660 G y GG 1.23E-25 8 
M129 20177104 C y CC 2.06E-74 27 
M136 20353140 C y CC 1.84E-47 15 
M138 20172242 G y GG 8.38E-47 15 
M145=P205 20176595 C y CC 3.09E-36 12 
M146 20238638 T y TT 8.75E-20 6 
M150 20328906 C y CC 4.57E-39 13 
M152 20327455 C y CC 6.30E-44 14 
M156 20176614 T y TT 7.14E-30 10 
M157 20327241 A y AA 2.53E-24 7 
M158 20175753 C y CC 6.43E-27 8 
M159 20210827 A y AA 3.98E-23 7 
M16 20069688 C y CC 8.27E-43 14 
M162 8680322 T y TT 5.89E-24 7 
M168 13323384 T y TT 5.78E-18 5 
M174 13463673 T y TT 1.16E-20 6 
M179 13348093 C y CC 1.38E-23 7 
M185 13414252 C y CC 1.60E-65 22 
M188 13434262 C y CC 3.50E-52 17 
M192 13523655 C y CC 2.79E-85 31 
M194 13523943 T y TT 5.65E-36 11 
M195 13525929 A y AA 1.39E-35 12 
M203 14100930 G y GG 6.31E-62 23 
M204 14100594 T y TT 4.31E-44 18 
M208 14085596 C y CC 1.42E-49 16 
M211 14054007 C y CC 5.77E-30 9 
M214 13981318 T y TT 2.58E-43 14 
M22 13299556 A y AA 2.65E-51 20 
M226 14100840 C y CC 1.31E-101 35 
M227 14100839 C y CC 3.05E-112 39 
M236 2709695 C y CC 3.21E-65 23 
M27 20199033 C y CC 1.11E-32 10 
M272 21148162 A y AA 3.81E-21 6 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 59
M274 21147188 C y CC 8.27E-91 34 
M28 20189226 T y TT 7.35E-43 15 
M288 2709693 G y GG 6.93E-70 24 
M3 17605756 G y GG 4.18E-24 7 
M300 21158585 G y GG 4.88E-47 15 
M31 20199141 G y GG 1.83E-47 15 
M314 21162466 A y AA 1.30E-15 4 
M323 20327105 C y CC 1.42E-35 12 
M324 2881785 G y GG 1.81E-32 10 
M329 2935526 G y GG 5.62E-30 9 
M34 20200103 G y GG 7.19E-32 10 
M343 2947823 A n CC 5.60E-36 14 
M346 2947154 A y AA 1.37E-20 6 
M347 2937477 C y CC 3.23E-40 13 
M35 20201090 G y GG 1.16E-52 17 
M365 2948677 A y AA 5.87E-35 11 
M367 2948627 A y AA 3.73E-87 31 
M368 2948631 A y AA 1.20E-78 30 
M369 2948476 G y GG 1.08E-20 6 
M370 2948597 C y CC 3.26E-128 45 
M387 2800273 T y TT 3.03E-21 6 
M41=P210 2723888 C y CC 6.10E-64 21 
M427 17601990 G y GG 1.55E-32 11 
M428 17601952 C y CC 1.04E-26 8 
M450 7608914 G y GG 9.24E-69 24 
M49 20328113 T y TT 1.78E-46 15 
M5=P73 20069333 C y CC 1.06E-20 6 
M50 20328059 T y TT 6.41E-61 20 
M51 20328250 G y GG 2.34E-38 12 
M54 20328651 G y GG 5.28E-173 65 
M56 20332273 A y AA 1.60E-21 6 
M58 20195691 G y GG 2.21E-15 4 
M59 20328163 A y AA 4.10E-28 9 
M61 20210836 C y CC 1.75E-38 12 
M63 20330025 G y GG 1.04E-32 10 
M64.2 20362770 A y AA 8.21E-16 4 
M65 20365652 A y AA 3.09E-84 32 
M66 20340960 A y AA 2.05E-26 8 
M70 20353268 A y AA 3.31E-15 4 
M71 20353834 C y CC 6.67E-18 5 
M8 7351533 G y GG 2.03E-15 4 
M83 20332674 C y CC 3.06E-114 40 
M89 20376700 T y TT 1.35E-21 6 
M90 20383716 C y CC 1.38E-15 5 
M93 20361892 C y CC 8.76E-24 7 
M98 20238621 C y CC 1.48E-26 8 
N1 13360919 C y CC 5.46E-21 6 
N2 20359275 T y TT 7.26E-27 8 
N4 20397919 A y AA 1.65E-15 4 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 60
N5 13360931 T y TT 2.50E-15 4 
P100 20362080 C y CC 6.11E-56 19 
P101 20362005 C y CC 4.73E-89 34 
P102 13987410 T y TT 1.09E-103 41 
P103 13987224 C y CC 7.75E-131 46 
P104 13987218 C y CC 2.47E-122 45 
P105 13932355 C y CC 2.54E-55 18 
P106 13932315 C y CC 6.87E-136 53 
P107 13329286 G y GG 3.35E-92 32 
P108 13935640 T y TT 1.59E-86 33 
P111 13935055 G y GG 5.53E-21 6 
P113 6800170 A y AA 3.70E-23 7 
P114 13530048 G y GG 1.48E-163 83 
P115 13378643 G y GG 3.77E-38 13 
P116 13379083 A y AA 1.05E-132 50 
P117 13329086 G y GG 3.30E-18 5 
P120 13935393 C y CC 1.79E-15 4 
P121 6799856 C y CC 1.09E-57 19 
P122 13360125 C y CC 3.04E-98 35 
P126 19685157 C y CC 8.84E-30 9 
P127 8650751 C y CC 2.51E-29 9 
P133 10476739 A y AA 1.34E-17 5 
P135 20078243 T y TT 2.11E-13 5 
P138 12709283 C y CC 1.31E-15 4 
P140 15821368 C y CC 2.50E-15 4 
P141 7001217 A y AA 1.75E-32 10 
P142 7278078 A y AA 2.45E-18 5 
P146 8662414 T y TT 1.25E-60 21 
P151 8740660 C y CC 1.52E-16 5 
P158 16002906 T y TT 8.06E-102 37 
P160 8534188 C y CC 1.71E-38 12 
P167 10461456 G y GG 4.30E-83 28 
P169 21327964 C y CC 4.82E-26 8 
P172 7025214 C y CC 4.17E-73 25 
P174 14318719 G y GG 3.12E-73 26 
P180 17110667 G y GG 1.12E-34 11 
P181 15903504 C y CC 2.41E-38 12 
P183 7392131 C y CC 2.41E-32 11 
P184 7278127 T y TT 1.19E-20 6 
P186 7628567 C y CC 2.39E-41 13 
P187 9168251 T y TT 4.93E-57 20 
P188 22043749 G y GG 5.35E-100 38 
P194 14712373 C y CC 3.28E-38 13 
P196 14263706 C y CC 5.61E-14 4 
P207 8679537 A y AA 1.48E-38 12 
P211 2723706 T y TT 6.44E-19 6 
P212 3605069 T y TT 1.09E-31 10 
P22=M104 8679591 G y GG 1.19E-64 22 
P221 8413706 C y CC 6.74E-35 11 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 61
P226 8905379 T y TT 1.42E-20 6 
P227 19869093 C n GG 6.16E-07 4 
P230 15979505 A y AA 1.12E-32 10 
P231 10599614 G n AA 6.77E-19 8 
P238 7831130 A n GG 2.80E-54 20 
P239 16390623 C y CC 7.63E-17 5 
P240 13108815 T n CC 5.63E-17 8 
P243 8745082 G y GG 6.03E-29 9 
P244 12943106 C y CC 4.13E-83 29 
P249 8395202 G y GG 1.97E-18 6 
P254 3604897 C y CC 1.79E-18 5 
P255 8745037 G y GG 5.51E-24 7 
P256 8745229 G y GG 2.48E-15 4 
P257 12942935 A n GG 3.54E-40 15 
P259 14100867 T y TT 1.09E-80 30 
P262 6992147 G y GG 5.97E-53 17 
P263 19625356 A y AA 1.55E-15 4 
P266 6799737 T y TT 2.86E-119 40 
P268 22399064 T y TT 4.97E-21 6 
P269 22399065 A y AA 2.44E-21 6 
P277 14088608 A y AA 4.61E-27 8 
P278 8527052 G y GG 5.12E-43 14 
P280 20302477 G n CC 4.25E-08 4 
P282 16538054 G y GG 9.03E-15 4 
P286 16225644 T n CC 4.56E-17 7 
P287 20531484 G y GG 5.76E-82 28 
P289 8527081 C y CC 8.54E-75 25 
P291 8526987 A y AA 1.23E-35 12 
P293 8835177 G y GG 1.17E-35 11 
P3 20069972 C y CC 4.31E-21 6 
P38 12994386 A y AA 9.90E-98 35 
P40 12994401 C y CC 3.18E-94 34 
P42 12991736 G y GG 1.27E-74 25 
P43 20340360 G y GG 7.61E-15 4 
P45 20340134 G y GG 2.46E-32 12 
P5 20303744 G y GG 3.71E-23 8 
P51 13002049 T y TT 3.72E-19 6 
P57 12997073 T y TT 4.57E-15 4 
P58 12996674 T y TT 2.70E-34 11 
P59 12994544 A y AA 1.72E-25 8 
P60 12994478 T y TT 1.07E-54 18 
P71 20071465 A y AA 6.40E-16 4 
P75 20340385 G y GG 1.12E-26 8 
P76 20340414 G y GG 1.25E-24 9 
P77 13435595 G y GG 2.25E-62 22 
P80 6799898 C y CC 4.55E-48 17 
P81 6799855 G y GG 2.80E-51 19 
P82 6799825 C y CC 3.16E-12 4 
P83 6799771 G y GG 5.77E-46 15 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 62
P84 6799766 G y GG 2.16E-49 18 
P87 13529112 A y AA 2.24E-68 25 
P90 13359972 C y CC 1.27E-69 24 
P91 13359992 C y CC 9.52E-61 20 
P93 13378895 C y CC 6.19E-95 35 
P94 13379074 G y GG 4.59E-127 47 
P95 13379099 G y GG 1.07E-160 58 
P96 13379136 C y CC 6.31E-33 10 
P97 13395666 T y TT 4.00E-61 22 
P98 13395750 C y CC 7.58E-125 43 
P99 13395779 C y CC 6.34E-57 21 
PK2 21078607 T y TT 1.49E-33 12 
PK4 19745349 A y AA 3.48E-21 6 
RPS4Y711=M130 2794853 C y CC 2.16E-41 14 
SRY2627=M167 2718270 G y GG 4.72E-81 30 
SRY4064=M40=P20 2723942 C y CC 2.34E-149 55 
SRY465 2715179 G y GG 1.36E-117 43 
SRY9138 =M177 2718868 G y GG 4.06E-53 18 
U106=M405 8856077 C y CC 1.04E-37 12 
U175 14763087 G y GG 4.19E-21 6 
U181 14883819 C y CC 2.55E-15 4 
U186 14987945 A y AA 5.09E-24 7 
U247=P253 17348768 C y CC 8.83E-16 6 
U290 20105445 T y TT 9.76E-146 53 
USP9Y+3636=M222 13411807 G y GG 4.44E-24 7 
V13 6902262 G y GG 2.46E-35 11 
V27 6956050 A y AA 1.10E-29 9 
V32 6992820 G y GG 4.82E-23 7 
V6 6992006 G y GG 2.38E-38 14 
V65 15797065 G y GG 1.84E-18 6 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 63
Table S9. Probabilities of observing the genotypes given the inbreeding state 
conditional on that there are no heterozygotes P(Gi| Gi ≠Aa, X),. pA and pa are the 
frequencies of the major and minor allele in locus i respectively. 
 
 X=0 X=1 
AA pA2/( pA2+pa2) pA 
aa pa2/( pA2+pa2) pa 
 
 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 64
Table S10. The transition probabilities for the Markov chain. Where t is time 
(measured in genetic distance), F is the inbreeding coefficient, and e-at corresponds to 
no change in the co-ancestry over a segment of length t [34]. 
 Xi+1=0 Xi+1=1 
Xi=0 e-at+(1- e-at)(1-F) (1- e-at)F 
Xi=1 (1- e-at)(1-F) e-at+(1- e-at)F 
 
 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 65
Table S11. The estimates of population size scaled divergence times. 
 
 Na-Dene Chukchis Koryaks Han Chinese Nganassans 
ML estimates 0.093 0.043 0.106 0.20 0.089 
95% CI lower 0.085 0.035 0.098 0.18 0.080 
95% CI upper 0.101 0.051 0.114 0.22 0.097 
 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 66
Table S12. Reference populations used to study the phylogeographic context of the 
Saqqaq genome. We have used relevant populations from the published data from Li 
et al. [50] and generated 197 new genome scans with Illumina 660/610K genotyping 
chips. “Group name” refers to usage of population groupings on Fig 3b, while “nr” 
refers to the numbers in Fig 3a. 
 
   Region   
  nr Popualtion Americas 
East 
Asia Siberia Europe Total Group name 
Li et al 1 Tuscan    7 7 Europeans 
- 2 North Italian    12 12 Europeans 
- 3 Russian    25 25 Europeans 
- 4 French    28 28 Europeans 
- 5 Daur  9   9 East Asia 
- 6 Hezhen  9   9 East Asia 
- 7 Oroqen  9   9 East Asia 
- 8 Xibo  9   9 East Asia 
- 9 Mongola  10   10 East Asia 
- 10 Tu  10   10 East Asia 
- 11 Uygur  10   10 East Asia 
- 12 Japanese  25   25 East Asia 
- 13 Han  44   44 East Asia 
- 14 Yakut   25  25  
- 15 Colombian 7    7 
South 
America 
- 16 Surui 8    8 
South 
America 
- 17 Karitiana 13    13 
South 
America 
- 18 Pima 14    14 
Middle 
America 
- 19 Maya 21       21 
Middle 
America 
Li et al 
Sum     63 135 25 72 295   
This study 20 Buryats   19  19 
Southern 
Siberia 
- 21 Koryaks   17  17  
- 22 Evenkis   16  16  
- 23 Tuvinians   16  16 
Southern 
Siberia 
- 24 Nganassans   15  15  
- 25 Chukchis   14  14  
- 26 Altai   13  13 
Southern 
Siberia 
- 27 Selkups   10  10  
- 28 Mongolians   9  9 East Asia 
- 29 Yukaghirs   9  9  
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 67
- 30 Dolgans   7  7  
- 31 Kets   2  2  
- 32 Na-Dene 21    21  
- 33 
East 
Greenlanders 10    10  
- 34 
West 
Greenlanders 10    10  
- 35 Aleutians 9    9  
-  Saqqaq 1       1  
This study 
Sum     51   147   198   
Total     114 135 172 72 493   
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 68
Table S13. Reference organisms used in the “chain-mapping” method for estimation 
of the composition of the metagenomic DNA extracted from the Saqqaq hair. First 
column describes the reference organism and the last column shows the number of 
mapped/identified at each step 
 
Human Reference Genome (Build 36.3) 2,701,861,758 
Human sequences with unknown location 72,656,547 
Chimpanzee genome 25,443,281 
NCBI completed microbial genomes 2,544,465 
Human microbiome 10,608,836 
GenBank non-redundant nucleotide database 185,197,431 
Unidentified 501,301,701 
 
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 69
 Table S14. List of SNP identifiers used for functional assessment. Associations to 
phenotype were curated from literature, public databases and HGMD Professional. 
Frequencies from Hapmap Phase-II are represented in pie charts, with the colour of 
the Saqqaq Allele matching the corresponding genotype in the pie charts. In most 
cases, the Saqqaq allele is closest to the Asian (Han Chinese and Japanese) 
populations.  
 
HapMap frequencies 
 SNP Reference 1-pp 
Saqqaq 
Allele CEU HCB JPT YRI 
rs81767191 66 NA -/- NA NA NA NA 
rs81767502 67 8.84E-34 G/G NA NA NA NA 
rs129138323 68 5.13E-10 A/A 
    
rs74951743 68 1.14E-25 A/G 
    
rs47782413 68 8.24E-06 A/A 
    
rs11290383 68 8.69E-40 C/C NA NA NA NA 
rs14266544 69 8.78E-12 G/G 
    
rs13856995 70 8.57E-05 T/T 
    
rs61525 71 4.12E-21 G/G NA NA NA NA 
rs15281336 63 1.50E-08 A/C 
    
rs22723836 63 1.42E-27 A/G 
    
rs22723826 63 8.40E-60 A/G 
    
rs57460597 62 1.64E-05 A/A 
    
rs178229318 72 8.36E-09 T/T 
    
rs38277609 73 5.61E-12 C/C 
    
rs1689198210 74 3.87E-13 C/C 
    
rs104252211 
75 2.75E-11 G/G 
    
rs1322238512 59 3.21E-05 A/G 
    
rs75114112 59 2.13E-07 T/T 
    
rs180040412 59 2.51E-14 A/A 
    
doi: 10.1038/nature08835 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
www.nature.com/nature 70
rs142665412 59 8.78E-12 G/G 
    
rs257093212 59 0.0015097 C/C     
rs1294661812 59 0.0013802 A/A     
rs1294611512 59 2.44E-06 C/C 
    
1Blood Group: not type O. 2Blood Group: A1 subtype. 3Brown eyes. 4Not European 
light skinned. 5Increased risk of baldness. 6Higher body mass index. 7Higher 
percentage fat mass in Caucasian and Chinese samples. 8Dry earwax, common in 
Asian people. 9Thick hair and Shovel shaped upper front teeth. 10More likely to have 
black hair (in European cohort study). 11 Cold adaptation: non-synonymous change in 
TP53. 12 Cold adaptation: Metabolic genes.	  
 
doi: 10.1038/nature0883