 
 
www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/1172257/DC1 
 
 
 
 
Supporting Online Material for 
 
The Genetic Structure and History of Africans and African Americans 
Sarah A. Tishkoff,* Floyd A. Reed, Françoise R. Friedlaender, Christopher Ehret,  
Alessia Ranciaro, Alain Froment, Jibril B. Hirbo, Agnes A. Awomoyi, Jean-Marie Bodo, 
Ogobara Doumbo, Muntaser Ibrahim, Abdalla T. Juma, Maritha J. Kotze, Godfrey Lema,  
Jason H. Moore, Holly Mortensen, Thomas B. Nyambo, Sabah A. Omar, Kweli Powell,  
Gideon S. Pretorius, Michael W. Smith, Mahamadou A. Thera, Charles Wambebe,  
James L. Weber, Scott M. Williams 
 
 
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: tishkoff@mail.med.upenn.edu 
 
 
Published 30 April 2009 on Science Express 
DOI: 10.1126/science.1172257 
 
 
This PDF file includes: 
Materials and Methods 
SOM Text 
Figs. S1 to S33 
Tables S1 to S9 
References 
 
 1
METHODS 
Sample collection and genotyping: IRB approval for this project was obtained from the 
University of Maryland at College Park, the University of Pennsylvania, and Vanderbilt 
University. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants and 
research/ethics approval and permits were obtained from the following institutions prior 
to sample collection: COSTECH and NIMR in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania; KEMRI in 
Nairobi, Kenya; the University of Khartoum in Sudan; Regional Hospital Sunyani, 
Ghana;  the Nigerian Institute for Research and Pharmacological Development, Abuja, 
Nigeria; the Ministry of Health and National Committee of Ethics, Cameroon; the 
University of Bamako Faculty of Medicine, Pharmacy, and Odonto-stomatology 
(FMPOS) Ethics Committee, Mali; for the South African samples, ethical clearance was 
obtained and a material transfer agreement signed with the University of Stellenbosch for 
use of the samples in the current study and approval was also obtained from Dr. Roger 
Chennels and the Working Group of Indigenous Minorities in Southern Africa (WIMSA). 
Self-identified ethnicity, parent and grandparent information was recorded. Use of the 
African American samples was approved by the Protocol Review Office of the 
Institutional Review Board of the National Cancer Institute and informed consent was 
obtained from all individuals at the study sites prior to sample collection.  Ethnic groups, 
sample size, language classification, and subsistence classification are given in Table S1. 
For the Kenyan, Sudanese, Nigerian, and Cameroonian samples, white cells were isolated 
in the field from whole blood with a salting out procedure modified from (S1)  and DNA 
was extracted in the lab with a Purgene™ DNA extraction kit (Gentra Systems Inc., 
Minneapolis, MN). Dogon samples were obtained from blood spots donated by 
participants in a cohort study of malaria incidence in Bandiagara, Mali. Ghanaian DNA 
was extracted onsite from whole blood, with the Purgene™ DNA extraction kit. The Ju-
speaking !Xun (a.k.a.Vasekela) and Khoe-speaking Khwe samples were collected from 
individuals in the area of Schmidtsdrift in the North-West Cape of South Africa. The 
Cape Mixed Ancestry (CMA) population, commonly referred to as Cape Coloured in 
South Africa, was collected in the Western Cape Province. The Dogon sample was 
collected in Bandiagara, Mali. Nigerian samples were collected in Abuja and Adamawa 
State districts. Cameroon samples were collected from the Eastern Province (Baka 
Pygmies and neighboring Bantu groups), Southern and Ocean Provinces (Bakola 
Pygmies and neighboring Bantu groups and coastal groups), Center Provinces (Medzan 
Pygmies and neighboring groups, mostly Bantu populations), Western Province 
(Bamileke and Mbororo Fulani groups), Extreme North Province (Mandara mountains 
and northern plains; Fulani and Afroasiatic/Nilo-Saharan speaking populations). All 
Cameroonians were sampled in their native village; the Hausa sample (a population who 
emigrated mainly from the Kano area two generations ago) was sampled in the city of 
Yaounde. Samples from Chad, CAR, Congo, DRC and Rwanda were obtained from 
individuals who recently immigrated to Cameroon.  Tanzanian DNA samples were 
collected from individuals residing in the Arusha and Dodoma provinces of Tanzania. 
Samples from Kenyan populations of southern Ethiopian origin (Burji, Konso) samples 
were collected in the Rift valley, Nyanza, and Eastern provinces of Kenya. Sudanese 
samples were collected in the Khartoum and Kasala provinces of the Sudan. The 
Yemenite Temani and Ethiopian Beta Israel samples were purchased from the National 
Laboratory for the Genetics of Israeli Populations (S2) . The South African !Xun/Khoe, 
 2
Xhosa, Vende, Cape Mixed Ancestry (CMA), Yemenite Temani, Beta Israel, and the 
Malian Dogon DNA samples were amplified by Whole Genome Amplification (WGA) 
with Illustra GenomiPhi HY™ kits provided by GE-Healthcare (Buckinghamshire, UK). 
It should be noted that the DNA for the Dogon population extracted from blood spots 
appeared to be of lower quality and microsatellite markers did not amplify as well as 
other samples obtained from whole blood (43% of markers had missing data). 
 
Data description: The full panel of Marshfield markers from screening sets #16 and #54 
(microsatellites) and #101 (indels) were initially genotyped in 3,325 individuals (3,194 
Africans, 109 African Americans, 22 Yemenites) sent to the Marshfield clinic for 
genotyping (a total of 40ug DNA/individual at a concentration of ~20ng/ul was used for 
genotyping). Genotyping data is available at (S3). Relatives were identified and removed 
as described below. Approximately 1% of the markers were removed because they 
consistently failed to amplify. Table S1 gives the average percent of genotypes that were 
missing due to either failed genotyping or to not having the marker in all datasets. Of the 
original 3,325 individuals genotyped, we removed the following individuals from 
subsequent analyses: 737 individuals who were inferred to be third degree or more 
closely related relatives (see below), 33 individuals with low genotyping success, two 
single individual representatives of population samples (Fante/Ewe and Nuba), and one 
individual who was an outlier in the PCA analysis (see below). The remaining dataset 
used for subsequent analyses consisted of 2,432 individuals from 113 African 
populations, 21 individuals from one Yemenite population and 98 African Americans 
from four locations in the United States (Table S1). Data coverage was 95.7% (4.3% of 
the sample/marker combinations yielded missing data).   
 
Data integration: To combine our dataset with preexisting data and place African 
genetic variability into a worldwide context, our data were integrated with data 
previously genotyped in the H952 subset of 1,048 samples in the CEPH-HGDP (S4, S5) , 
432 samples of Indian descent from 15 populations (S6), and 10 Native Australian 
samples of unknown ethnic population origin (provided by European Collection of Cell 
Cultures, Salisbury, UK). A table of marker size adjustments (to account for changes in 
the PCR primers used in different Marshfield screening sets) and allele size adjustments 
are shown in Table S2. The combined dataset contains a total of 1,327 genotyped 
markers (consisting of 848 microsatellites, 476 indels and 3 SNPs) and 3,945 DNA 
samples. The overall overlap of markers genotyped in the combined dataset is 80% (not 
all markers were genotyped in all populations), resulting in total of ~4,000,000 
genotypes. 
 
Ascertainment Bias (AB) in the microsatellite marker set: 374 of the Marshfield 
markers (the GATA microsatellite repeats) were ascertained in individuals of recent 
European ancestry and 953 non-GATA markers were ascertained in a world-wide panel. 
Therefore, we tested for the possibility of ascertainment bias in the GATA markers. A 
significant deviation between the European and non-European samples in the ratio of 
GATA to non-GATA population variances was found (Mann-Whitney U test, U=1030, 
Z=2.97, p=1.49 x 10-3). This deviation is in the direction of higher relative levels of 
variability in the Europeans with European ascertained GATA repeat markers compared 
 3
to the non-GATA markers that were ascertained in a world-wide panel, consistent with an 
effect of population ascertainment bias in a subset of these markers (Fig. S33). Because 
of the potential effects of AB, these markers were removed from the estimates of genetic 
diversity on the basis of microsatellite allele variance and heterozygosity. 
 
Detection of relative pairs: Relative pairs and duplicated samples in the dataset were 
inferred from the pattern of shared genotypes and population allele frequencies with 
RELPAIR 2.0.1 ( 6-8) . Because the inclusion of closely related individuals can impact 
population genetic inferences [e.g. (S9)], we took the conservative approach of excluding 
individuals inferred to  be third degree or more closely related, including inferred relative 
pairs between regional ethnic populations (e.g. all Tanzanian populations). An exception 
was made in the case of the Dogon as it is difficult to reliably infer relative pairs in a 
small sample and the Dogon are highly distinctive and could not be readily merged with 
other populations to improve allele frequency estimates. Merging the Dogon with other 
non-Pygmy West African populations inferred four unrelated individuals in the sample, 
but this may be overly conservative given the distinctiveness of the Dogon sample from 
other West Africans. Also, the Dogon are the only representatives from Mali in our study 
and since the sample size is already small we did not want to further reduce the sample 
size in the analyses, especially if the relative pair estimates were questionable. Therefore, 
RELPAIR inferred relative pairs among the Dogon were not excluded. In total 737 
individuals were removed. Networks of relatives, which in some cases were quite 
complex, were plotted with neato from the GraphViz software package (S10), which was 
used to select the minimum number of individuals to exclude to break up networks of 
relative pairs. 
 
NJ tree from Rst/(δμ)2 estimation: An unrooted neighbor joining tree from pairwise 
(δμ)2 genetic distances from all microsatellite data (S11)  was constructed with neighbor 
from the PHYLIP version 3.6 (S12) software package with randomly ordered taxa. All 
nodes that were supported by at least 50% consensus, with 1000 bootstrap replicates 
determined with consense from PHYLIP, were labeled with the number of bootstrap 
replicates that support the node in Fig. 1. Edges with >90% bootstrap support have 
thicker lines. For ease and clarity of plotting, an edge with high bootstrap support near 
the midpoint of the tree that divides the African and non-African populations was 
arbitrarily selected as the central edge for plotting, but this remains an unrooted tree and 
should not be interpreted as the inferred oldest edge in, or root of, the tree. However, this 
result is consistent with previous trees of human populations that show the primary 
division in modern humans to be between populations south of the Sahara and the rest of 
the world [e.g. (S13-16)] . Rooting the (δμ)2 tree with chimpanzee data was not possible 
because of the high mutation rate of the microsatellite markers and high levels of 
homoplasy. 
 
Estimates of genetic diversity from the average microsatellite repeat unit length 
variance: Theta was estimated as twice the variance in repeat length units, θ = 2σ 2 , 
(under a stepwise mutation model) (S17) . Prior to analyses GATA repeats were excluded 
due to possible effects of ascertainment bias, discussed above. 
 
 4
Heterozygosity: The expected heterozygosity was computed from the microsatellites 
with the GDA software (S18), with the sample-size corrected estimator, as in (S19). From 
Ohta and Kimura (S20), under a stepwise model, the expected relationship between θ and 
heterozygosity (H) is 
θ21
11
+
−=H
,  
which rearranges to 
( ) ⎟
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
−
−
= 1
1
1
2
1
2H
θ .  
For autosomal loci in an ideal population, θ is defined as θ = 4Neμ, where Ne is defined as 
the effective population size and μ is the per generation mutation rate.  Prior to analyses 
GATA repeats were excluded due to possible effects of ascertainment bias, discussed 
above. 
 
Estimates of shared and private alleles: The ADZE software (S21) was used to 
estimate the number of private and shared alleles within and between populations and 
geographic regions. The ADZE software implements a rarefaction approach for counting 
alleles private to combinations of populations by evaluating the number of alleles found 
in each of a set of populations but absent in all remaining populations, considering equal-
sized subsamples from each population (S21). 
 
Analysis of Molecular Variance (AMOVA) : Variance components were estimated for 
the 848 microsatellites, as in equation 5.3 from (S22), with GDA (S18), with 95% 
confidence intervals created on the basis of 1000 bootstraps across loci. 
 
Mapping population geographic coordinates: Approximate coordinates of the 
traditional range for each ethnic group were determined from Ethnologue’s language 
maps (S23) or as reported previously for the CEPH diversity panel and Indian datasets 
(S6, S24, S25). The average latitude and longitude was used when a range of coordinates 
was given for a single population or for samples composed of a few individuals from 
different neighboring populations. For data from previously published population 
samples, the reported geographic coordinates were used (S24, S25). A complete listing of 
coordinates can be found in Table S1. 
 
Serial founder effect analysis: The geographic origin of modern humans and the route 
of migration out of Africa south of the Sahara to northern Africa and Eurasia were 
estimated from the data under a serial founder effect model (S25). This inference was 
created on the basis of the geographic position of sampled populations and estimated 
levels of genetic diversity for each population (θ estimated from the average 
microsatellite repeat unit length variance). Under this model, the highest levels of modern 
genetic variation are expected to occur in the geographic region of origin of modern 
humans. As modern human populations migrated away from this point, founder effects 
steadily reduced levels of genetic diversity with geographic distance (S25). Thus, the 
 5
point of origin is predicted to have the most negative correlation (r) between genetic 
diversity and distance from the origin, i.e. diversity decreases with distance from this 
point, yielding a negative slope. A grid of all points of origin was evaluated and the 
resulting correlation between diversity and great circle distance (i.e. along the curvature 
of the earth) from these points was plotted. Furthermore, rather than fixing a single 
waypoint of migration for populations in Northern Africa and Eurasia [cf. (S25)], this 
point was also varied over a grid, simultaneously with the point of origin, and the best fit 
(according to a least squares linear regression) was found. 
The grid of potential points of origin, excluding Oceania and the Americas, was 
evaluated, and the resulting correlation (r) between diversity and great circle distance (i.e. 
along the curvature of the earth) from these points was plotted (Fig. S28). The portion of 
the globe encompassing Africa and Eurasia (-40 to 70 degrees latitude, and -22.5 to 187.5 
degrees longitude) was divided into a grid with units of 2.5 degrees, creating a 45x85 grid 
with 3,825 total points. However, because Oceania and the oceans were excluded as 
possible points of origin or waypoints out of Africa, only 1,495 grid points were plotted. 
10,000 bootstrap replicates were created where populations were randomly re-sampled, 
with replacement, from the full set of sampled populations (thus, some populations were 
included more than once and some not at all in individual bootstrap replicates) and the 
procedure was repeated for each bootstrap replicate. This procedure was used to 
determine the geographic confidence region for both the origin and the waypoint (Fig. 
S29). The points with the best fit in each replicate were chosen as the origin and 
waypoint. 
Also, within this serial founder effect framework, the predicted regional levels of 
expected genetic variation were estimated (Fig. S2C). To do this, we used a linear 
regression weighted by geographic distance away from each point of evaluation (i.e. 
nearby levels of variation contribute more to the correlation than points further away) and 
solved for the intercept (i.e. the predicted level of variation at that point, where distance is 
equal to zero, on the basis of the relationship between genetic variation and distance 
away from each point). 
 
TESS analysis: The genetic clustering of individuals in the presence of a spatial 
geographic network was inferred with TESS (S 26). Because only a single geographic 
point is used for each population, the individuals within a population were randomly 
assigned geographic positions over a narrow range, ±0.1 degree N-S and E-W, centered 
on the population value (this avoids identical geographic placements that can obscure 
heterogeneous clustering results within population samples). The no-admixture model 
was used and the interaction parameter was set to one, ψ=1. The maximum number of 
clusters was set to K=10 (of which the program estimated the presence of K=6 clusters). 
Five primary run sets of five runs each (25 total primary runs) were run for 2,000 steps, 
then each of the five sets were extended in a single secondary run (five total secondary 
runs) of 2,000 steps starting from the highest likelihood endpoint of the five primary runs 
in each set. Finally, the highest likelihood result at the end of these five secondary runs 
was chosen to display the resulting geographic clustering pattern. 
 
Principal Components Analysis: The EIGENSOFT software package [(S9, S27)] was 
used for individual principal components analyses. Smartpca (of the EIGENSOFT 
 6
package) was recompiled and the makefile edited to substitute a gfortran library call for 
the f2c library call. The microsatellite data was converted into a false SNP format by 
scoring the presence or absence of each of n-1 alleles (where n is the number of alleles in 
the sample). The in/del data were converted to a binary coding for the presence or 
absence of a reference allele. 
 
Unsupervised STRUCTURE analysis: Population structure was inferred with a 
Bayesian clustering approach implemented in the STRUCTURE software package [(S28, 
S29)]. This program identifies groups of individuals with similar allele frequency profiles 
(S29, S30). This clustering approach avoids a priori population classifications, instead 
estimating the shared population ancestry of individuals based solely on their genotypes 
under an assumption of Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and linkage equilibrium in ancestral 
populations. It infers individual proportions of ancestry from K clusters, where K is 
specified in advance and corresponds to the number of posited ancestral populations and 
can be varied across independent runs. Individuals can be assigned admixture estimates 
from multiple ancestral populations, with the admixture estimates summing to 1 across 
these population clusters. 
STRUCTURE Version 2.2.3 was used for unsupervised STRUCTURE runs 
assuming the F model of correlated allele frequencies among the ancestral clusters (S31) 
with a 20,000 step burn-in and 10,000 step chain, with a separate α estimated for each 
population (POPALPHAS = 1). The latter allows for asymmetric patterns of admixture 
amongst the inferred populations. 
We analyzed the global dataset, the African dataset, and African regional data 
subsets separately with an unsupervised STRUCTURE analysis. 25 replicates were run 
for each K (number of ancestral clusters assumed) and each dataset. We ran up to K = 15 
for the global, African, and East African datasets, K = 10 for the Middle African and 
Western African datasets, and K = 5 for the Saharan African and South African datasets. 
The structure outputs were processed with CLUMPP (S 32) and a G-statistic greater than 
90% was used to assign groups of runs to a common clustering pattern. The maximum K 
value was determined on the basis of: (1) the K value at which the likelihood distribution 
reached a maximum and began to plateau or decrease; (2) high stability of clustering 
patterns between runs (the primary mode was observed in at least 60% of the 25 runs) 
and; (3) from the Kmax value at which Kmax + 1 no longer refines the clusters (i.e. 
Kmax + 1 no longer splits the cluster distinguished at Kmax). The run with the highest 
likelihood of the data given the parameter values for the predominant clustering pattern 
(i.e. the mode) at each K was used for plotting with DISTRUCT (S33, S34). 
 
Supervised STRUCTURE analysis: With STRUCTURE Version 2.2.3, individuals 
from populations having a high frequency of distinct ancestral clusters inferred with the 
unsupervised structure analyses (Papua New Guineans, Pima Native Americans, Han 
Chinese, French, Indian, Iraqw, Hadza, Baka Pygmies, San, Dinka, Fulani, Mandinka, 
Mada, Lemande) were used as 14 training populations and a supervised analysis was 
performed in order to determine membership coefficients in the African Americans and 
Cape Mixed Ancestry individuals. For this analysis, we included both Bantu (Lemande) 
and non-Bantu (Mandinka) Niger-Kordofanian populations with highest frequencies of 
distinct ancestral clusters on the basis of the unsupervised STRUCTURE analysis of 
 7
western Africa (Fig. S24). Ten replicates were done which gave similar results and the 
mean of these replicates was used for plotting Fig. S32. 
 
NJ tree inferred from inferred ancestral clusters in STRUCTURE: Unrooted NJ 
trees were constructed with Phylip software version 3.66 (S12) from the average pairwise 
nucleotide distance between ancestral clusters (S31). 
 
Geographic vs genetic distance analyses: Analyses were performed to assess the 
relationship between geographic distance and genetic differences at multiple scales: 
within major global regions and within Africa. Great circle geographic distances were 
calculated with the Haversine method, as described (S25). Prior to analyses, genetic 
distances were tested for normality, with the Shapiro Wilkes test (S35). All populations 
deviated from normality (p ≤ 0.01) except the Middle Eastern (p=0.26) and European 
(0.06) populations.  Because of the highly significant deviation from normality in all 
other populations, correlation analysis was done, with the non-parametric Spearman’s 
Rho test, which was calculated at the following levels: all Africa, Middle East, Central 
Asia, East Asia, India, and Europe. Within Africa regions were divided into Eastern 
Africa, Southern Africa, Central Africa, Saharan Africa, and Western Africa. To test for 
heterogeneity of Spearman’s Rho, Fisher r-to-z transformations of the Spearman 
correlation coefficients was performed (S36). All analyses were performed with SAS 
software (S37). 
 
Genetic/linguistic diversity correlations: In a historical linguistic classification, 
languages are attributed to particular clades and subclades in a language family on the 
basis of their common possession of particular linguistic ‘mutations,’ i.e., unique 
innovations in lexicon, lexical meanings, phonology, and grammar.  Such shared 
innovations are analogous to genetic mutations, in that they attest to the descent of the 
languages in question from earlier single ancestral languages, in which the innovations 
(‘mutations’) took place.  In every case this kind of evidence forms the primary basis for 
constructing the family trees of the African language families (Fig S30).  Where the 
evidence is extensive, complex and detailed trees of successive language divergences can 
be constructed, as the case of the Nilo-Saharan family illustrates (Fig. S30h) (S38) .  For 
Afroasiatic, an outline presentation of the innovations on which its primary branchings 
are based can be found in (S39).  A variety of other sources present the testimony of 
linguistic innovation for the internal subgrouping of the Chadic branch (S40), the Omotic 
branch (S41), and the Cushitic branch (S42, S43), along with its Eastern Cushitic (S44) 
and Southern Cushitic (S45) subclades.  For the classification of Niger-Kordofanian into 
its major clades and subclades, the work of Williamson and Blench (S46) has been 
followed.  A detailed Bantu subclassification based on phonological, pronominal, and 
lexical innovations, combining the findings of a number of scholars, can be accessed at 
(S47). 
 The language distance measures in this study rest on a different kind of evidence, 
lexicostatistics.  Its results turn out to be generally congruent with the evidence of lexical, 
phonological, and grammatical innovation.  The data come from a large number of 
sources—for Bantu (S48), non-Bantu Niger-Kordofanian subclades  (S49-54), Nilo-
Saharan  (S41, S55-61), Afroasiatic (S41, S45, S62, S63), and Khoesan (S 64, S65) (see 
 8
also (S47)).  The values indicated at each node in the language relationship trees are 
calculated medians of the distributions of attested pairwise percentages of cognation for 
languages whose ancestral forms diverged from each other at the particular node. 
Divergence times between related languages were estimated with archeological 
dates and glottochronological methods (S66, S67). However, these age estimates were not 
used for the correlations with genetic distance. Rather, levels of shared cognates between 
population pairs were used to infer linguistic similarities (scaled from 0-1; Fig. S30). The 
relationship between linguistic distance (1- language similarity) and genetic distances 
(δμ)2 was then analyzed within language families. We restricted our analyses to within 
language families because of the more rapid decay of linguistic as compared to genetic 
similarities. The sampled Pygmy populations, which speak Niger-Kordofanian languages 
today, are a well known case of recent language replacement. This, taken together with 
the Pygmies genetic dissimilarity to other Niger-Kordofanian populations, led us to 
analyze the pairs within the Niger-Kordofanian family with and without the Pygmies. 
Differences between results can be used to infer the relationship between language and 
genetic distance in Pygmy populations relative to other NK populations. 
Regression analyses were performed with (δμ)2 as the dependent variable and 
language distance (1- the similarity index) and geographic distance as independent 
variables, with SAS (Version 9.1). Since language distances were not normally 
distributed (Shapiro Wilks test, p <0.001) the language variables were transformed with 
an inverse transformation (1/language distance). Regression analyses were performed on 
the transformed variable and then adjusted for geographic distance. In addition, an 
interaction term (language similarity X geographic distance) was added to the model and 
tested for significance. A regression of (δμ)2 on geographic distance was also analyzed 
and adjusted for language. The reduced models were: genetic distance ((δμ)2) = μ +α 
(language similarity) + ε and genetic distance = μ + β(geographic distance) + ε. The full 
model was: genetic distance = μ + β(geographic distance) + α (language similarity) + ε. 
The full model was analyzed with and without an interaction term. Only within language 
family comparisons were performed. These included the AA, NS, and NK with and 
without Pygmies. Adjustment for the second dependent variable is only possible when 
the two variables are not co-linear. This was examined, and was not an issue for the 
analyses performed with the exception of the Cushitic speakers (see below).  
 
Statistical significance: Unless otherwise noted, we considered a statistic significant if 
the p-value for the test was less than or equal to a type I error rate of 0.05. 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY TEXT 
African language classification 
There are over 2,000 distinct ethno-linguistic groups in Africa, speaking nearly a 
third of the world’s languages (S23).  Except for a few unallocated languages, the 
languages of Africa have been classified into four macro-families: Niger-Kordofanian, 
Afroasiatic, Nilo-Saharan, and Khoesan.  Here we use the spelling of Afroasiatic as 
originally defined by Joseph Greenberg in the 1950s (S68) rather than the derivative 
“Afro-Asiatic” spelling.  Of the four African language families, Niger-Kordofanian is the 
most wide-spread.  Its languages are spoken across half of Africa. Some of the West 
African Niger-Kordofanians sampled in our study belonged to urbanized societies, with 
 9
centralized political structures, social stratification, and elaborate ritual institutions, and 
were historically involved in complex systems of long-distance trade (e.g. the Yoruba and 
other southern Nigerians, as well as the Asante and Brong, for the past 1500 years, and 
the Malinke (Mende) and their ancestors since 3,500-3,000 ya). Many of the Niger- 
Kordofanians of Central and southeastern Africa sampled in this study belonged to 
chiefdom-size polities since 1500-1000 ya, but others, most notably the Kongo, formed 
powerful kingdoms with widespread trade connections across the Congo basin (S69).  
The Afroasiatic family includes a great variety of societies. Many Chadic peoples 
of West Africa lived in chiefdom-sized agricultural communities, but the Hausa in 
particular for the past 1000 years have formed an urbanized society with cities of up to 
50,000 inhabitants, engaged in manufacture and widespread commercial activities. The 
Amazigh-speaking Mzab of the Sahara formed a commercial enclave with similarly 
widespread commercial relations. Many of the Cushitic populations, in contrast, were 
organized into village-scale farming or agro-pastoral communities; others such as the 
Beja pastoralists and Oromo mixed farmers formed alliances of up to several thousand 
people, on the basis of either clan confederacies or on age-grade institutions of 
governance (S69). This language family also includes the ancient Egyptians and one 
group, the Semites, who reside in northern Africa and the Middle East (S70). 
The Nilo-Saharan family extends across another wide expanse of Africa, from the 
Songay of Mali in the west to the Nilotes of southern Sudan and Eastern Africa. The 
Central Sudanic groups of the Chad Basin formed both chiefdoms and kingdoms in 
recent centuries, while the Kanuri and Kanembu over the past 1000 years belonged to 
powerful kingdoms with wide-reaching commercial connections. States as early as 3500 
BC along the Nubian Nile also spoke Nilo-Saharan languages (S62, S69). In contrast, the 
Nilotic peoples often belonged to large alliances, clan-based as among the Dinka and 
Nuer of southern Sudan or from age-grade institutions as among the Maasai of East 
Africa (S69). 
The fourth family, Khoesan, is highly unusual in being composed today primarily 
of residual hunter-gatherer populations (e.g. San, !Xun/Khoe, Hadza, Sandawe), with 
only the Sandawe being recently established farmers and herders, albeit with strong 
ideological attachments to hunting remaining (S71).   However, it should be noted that 
the classification of Hadza and Sandawe as Khoesan is a contentious issue (S72)  since 
they are highly divergent from each other and from SAK languages.  Linguistic data 
indicates that the Hadza language, in particular, is especially divergent from, or perhaps 
unrelated to, other Khoesan languages (S73, S74) 
 
African classification by subsistence mode 
African populations were classified based on subsistence modes historically 
practiced by the ethnic populations listed in Table S1.  These include populations that 
historically practiced a diverse and complex array of subsistence modes, including animal 
domestication (herding), plant cultivation (farming), plant cultivation and herding (mixed 
farming) and hunting and gathering.  Although the majority of the newly collected 
African samples included in this study originated from individuals living in rural 
populations that continue to practice farming- or herding-based economies, some of the 
populations (e.g. Mende, Xhosa, Yoruba, among others) include individuals living in 
cities who no longer engage in farming or herding practices.  African non-forager 
 10
populations include the numerous stratified, commercially active, and politically 
centralized societies, as well as the up-till-recently large clan- or age-grade-based 
societies and the smaller village-scale societies.   
 
Comparison of genetic diversity (θ) inferred from microsatellite variance versus 
heterozygosity 
Estimates of genetic diversity (θ=4Neμ) from the sample variance in repeat length 
of the microsatellite alleles compared to (θ) on the basis of heterozygosity are shown in 
Fig. S2. The correlation between variance and heterozygosity estimates (R2 = .927, p = 
1.19x10-104) is shown in Fig. S4. Three African hunter-gatherer populations are included 
in the five populations with highest measured levels of genetic diversity on the basis of 
variance of microsatellite allele length; the Baka and Bakola Pygmies from Cameroon 
and the San from Namibia (the other two populations with highest diversity are the 
Ntumu from Cameroon and the Burunge from Tanzania) (Fig. S2A). In contrast, the five 
populations with highest diversity from heterozygosity estimates are the Burunge, Turu, 
Gogo, and Sukuma from Tanzania (all agriculturalist or agro-pastoralist populations), and 
the African Americans from Baltimore (Fig. S2B). The San and the Hadza hunter-
gatherers are amongst the African populations with lowest levels of heterozygosity. 
Prior studies from simulations as well as empirical data have indicated that the 
ratio of θ inferred from variance relative to θ inferred from heterozygosity can be 
informative for inferring past population expansion and bottleneck events (S75, S76). 
Specifically, a population bottleneck followed by population expansion causes an 
imbalance between estimates of θ with allele size variance and those with heterozygosity 
(S75), because the variance estimate is transiently higher than expected under equilibrium 
conditions, resulting in the variance θ to heterozygosity θ ratio being greater than one. By 
contrast, populations which have recently expanded in the absence of a strong bottleneck 
event exhibit ratios of variance to heterozygosity less than one. This is because after 
expansion, both variance and heterozygosity increase as the population approaches a new 
mutation-drift equilibrium. If the expansion is sufficiently recent with mutation events 
largely restricted to the post expansion period and distributed among many lineages, the 
initial effect is to increase heterozygosity from new mutations more than allele size 
variance, since the latter quantity is more sensitive to mutations that distinguish the oldest 
lineages and requires more mutational events to recover (S76). As a result, heterozygosity 
approaches its new limit value faster than genetic variance (S76). 
The ratios of θ inferred from variance and heterozygosity for the current dataset 
are shown in Fig. S3. The ratio of variance and heterozygosity is the largest in Native 
American and Papuan and Melanesian populations followed by East Asians, all with 
values greater than one, intermediate in most Europeans, Middle Easterners, and Indians, 
with values near one, and with values less than one in most African populations and a 
few Middle Eastern and European populations. This observation is consistent with 
previous findings, suggesting a strong bottleneck followed by a recent and rapid 
expansion in Native Americans and Australo-Melanesians, and expansion but lack of a 
recent strong bottleneck in Africans (S75, S77). Interestingly, the San and the Hadza 
hunter-gatherers have the highest ratio of variance relative to heterozygosity among 
almost all African populations, with a ratio value slightly greater than 1.0 (Fig. S3). The 
only African population with a larger ratio is the Dogon. The Hadza and San are also 
 11
apparent outliers in the plot of θ inferred from heterozygosity shown in Fig. S2B. These 
results are consistent with relatively stable small population sizes in these hunter-gatherer 
populations, although simulations will be required to obtain detailed demographic 
parameter values. 
 
Details of global STRUCTURE results 
When two clusters are assumed in the STRUCTURE analysis (K = 2), individuals 
can primarily be assigned to African (orange) or non-African (blue) clusters, consistent 
with the PCA (Fig. 3).  Individuals from Saharan and Eastern Africa show heterogeneous 
ancestry, reflecting descent from populations ancestral to non-Africans and/or gene flow 
from non-Africans into Africa.  We also find evidence for low levels of African ancestry 
in several Middle Eastern and Oceanic populations.  The latter observation is consistent 
with possible gene flow into these regions and with studies based on archeological and 
genetic data, indicating an early migration event of modern humans out of Africa, across 
southern Asia, and into Oceania (S30, S78). With three clusters (K = 3), the East Asian, 
Oceanic and Native American individuals become distinguished (pink) (with individuals 
from South and Central Asia showing heterogeneous ancestry), again consistent with the 
PCA.  With a fourth cluster (K = 4), many Eastern African populations (purple), 
particularly the Hadza and Afroasiatic speakers, are distinguishable from other African 
populations.  At K = 4, the Middle Eastern and Oceanic populations both show evidence 
for low levels of Eastern African ancestry.  The fifth cluster (K = 5) distinguishes the 
Hadza hunter-gatherer population (yellow), consistent with PCA (Fig. 2), and to a lesser 
extent the Pygmy, SAK, and Sandawe hunter-gatherer populations.  The sixth cluster (K 
= 6), distinguishes the western Pygmies (dark green).  The seventh cluster (K = 7) 
distinguishes African individuals who speak Chadic (a western Afroasiatic sub-family) 
and/or Nilo-Saharan languages (red).  The eighth cluster (K =8) distinguishes the Indian 
individuals (dark pink) and the Oceanic populations, consistent with possible shared 
ancestry of these populations.  The ninth cluster (K = 9) distinguishes the Oceanic 
individuals (light green).  The tenth cluster (K = 10) distinguishes the Native American 
individuals (dark purple).  The eleventh cluster (K = 11) distinguishes the Mbuti Pygmy 
and SAK individuals (light green), indicating shared common ancestry of these 
geographically distant hunter-gatherer populations.  At K = 12, the Chadic and Nilo-
Saharan speaking populations originating from northern Cameroon, Chad, and southern 
Sudan, become distinct (maroon).  The thirteenth cluster (K = 13) distinguishes the 
Sandawe from Tanzania (brown) (traditionally hunter-gatherers who recently adopted 
mixed farming) and the fourteenth cluster (K =14) distinguishes the nomadic pastoral 
Fulani populations (fuchsia).  Several of the African populations (the CMA, Fulani, and 
eastern Afroasiatic-speakers) show low to moderate levels of the European/Middle 
Eastern cluster, consistent with possible gene flow from those regions. At K = 10-14, the 
non-African pattern essentially recaptures the results of prior studies of the CEPH-HGDP 
(S4-6, S79, S80) in which individuals cluster by major geographic regions.  However, our 
data reveal considerably more substructure among Africans (nine at K = 14) than 
previously observed (S4-6, S79, S80).   
Allele frequencies from inferred ancestral clusters derived from the 
STRUCTURE analysis at K = 14 were used to construct an un-rooted neighbor-joining 
tree (Fig. S12). African and non-African Associated Ancestral Clusters (AACs; labeled 
 12
based on the populations showing the highest levels of ancestry for each inferred 
ancestral cluster) are highly divergent. The Oceanic AAC is the branch closest to the 
African AACs, followed by a clade formed by the European and Indian AACs, and 
finally a clade formed by the Asian and Native American AACs.  Within Africa, the 
Pygmy and SAK AACs form a clade, as do the Hadza and Sandawe AACs, and the Nilo-
Saharan and Chadic AACs.  The Fulani and Cushitic (an eastern Afroasiatic subfamily) 
AACs, which likely reflect Saharan African and East African ancestry, respectively, are 
closest to the non-African AACs, consistent with an East African migration of modern 
humans out of Africa or a back-migration of non-Africans into Saharan and Eastern 
Africa.   
 
Genetic variation within Africa 
The proportion of variation among African populations classified based on 
geographic, linguistic, and subsistence classification was determined based on AMOVA 
analysis of the microsatellite data.  It should be noted that sampling design influences 
inferences of variance among populations.  Indeed, the proportion of variation among 
African populations inferred from AMOVA analysis of the microsatellite data is 2.59% 
for the CEPH-HGDP African populations but is 1.71% in our expanded set of Africans 
(Table S3), likely due to an over-representation of relatively isolated hunter-gatherer 
populations in the CEPH-HGDP.  Within Africa, southern Africa shows the highest level 
of among population variation (2.13%), presumably reflecting the highly divergent SAK 
populations. Hunter-gatherer populations in general had the highest levels of among 
population variance (3.18%). Populations that speak Khoesan languages, most of whom 
are (or until recently were) hunter-gatherers were relatively variable (3.39%). In contrast, 
African herding and farming populations had the lowest levels of among population 
variance (0.94% and 0.97%, respectively), possibly due to population expansions, 
assimilations, and long range migrations over the past ~5,000 years (S81, S82) . Low 
levels of population variance were also observed among the Nilo-Saharan (1.13%) and 
Niger-Kordofanian (1.17%) language families, many of whom originated from herding 
and farming societies, respectively. 
 
Details of Africa STRUCTURE results 
The Africa-wide STRUCTURE result (Fig. S13) largely recapitulates the African  
PCA results. Specifically, the western and eastern African populations were 
distinguishable at K=2, several hunter-gatherer (or former hunter-gatherer) populations at 
K=3 (the Hadza, Sandawe, SAK, and Pygmies shown in yellow), and the Hadza (yellow) 
are distinguished from the SAK and Pygmies (dark green) at K=4. As K increases, the 
following population clusters are sequentially distinguished: the Nilo-Saharan and Chadic 
speaking individuals (shown in red) from K=5 upward; individuals with some European 
or Middle Eastern ancestry, as inferred from the global STRUCTURE analysis, from K=6 
upward (shown in blue, consisting of eastern African Afroasiatic and Nilo-Saharan 
speaking populations, the Fulani, and CMA population); the SAK and Mbuti Pygmies 
(shown in light green) are distinguished from the western Pygmies (dark green) at K=7 
and higher; the Sandawe (shown in brown) from K=8 and higher; the Fulani (pink) at 
K=9 and higher; the Mbugu (who speak a Southern Cushitic language with extreme 
Bantu admixture (S45, S83), shown in dark purple) at K=10 and higher; the Cushitic 
 13
speaking populations of southern Ethiopian origin (Borana, Burji, Konso) and northern 
Kenya (Wata, Rendille and Gabra) at K = 11 and 13 (light purple); at K = 14, Nilotic 
Nilo-Saharan speaking populations (i.e. Maasai, Dogon, Sengwer, Saboat, Tugen, 
Samburu, Marakwet, Sengwer, Okiek, Nandi, Saboat, Turkana, Pokot; red) are 
distinguished from the Central Sudanic Nilo-Saharans (Laka, Ngambaye, Kaba, Bulala, 
Kenembou, Sara; tan), and Chadic-speaking populations (Mada, Ouldeme, Giziga, 
Mandara, Kotoko, Zulgo, Pdokwo, Massa, Hausa) and Semetic-speaking Baggara 
(maroon). The Bantu speakers of South Africa (Xhosa, Venda), had high proportions of 
the SAK and western African Bantu AACs, and low levels of the East African Bantu 
AAC (the latter is also present in Bantu speakers from Democratic Republic of Congo 
and Rwanda). These results demonstrate, with nuclear genetic markers, evidence for two 
sources of migration (from the East and West) of Bantu speakers into southern Africa. 
These results are consistent with linguistic and archeological evidence, suggesting a 
distinct East African Bantu migration event into southern Africa from a core area west of 
Lake Victoria ~2,000 ya (S 84) and the incorporation of Khoekhoe ancestry into several 
of the Southeast-Bantu populations ~1,500 – 1,000 ya. The incorporation of a major 
Khoekhoe demic component in the proto-Sotho and proto-Nguni societies of ~1,500-
1000 ya in South Africa is demonstrated in both proto-languages by their separate 
borrowings of Khoekhoe loanword sets of the heavy intensive category (S85), a 
diagnostic marker of this kind of population history (S86). 
 
Origins of Nilo-Saharan and Afroasiatic Cushitic speaking populations 
The southern/central Sudanese show high levels of both the Nilo-Saharan (red) 
and Afroasiatic Cushitic (purple) AACs from K = 8-13 (Fig S13), consistent with 
linguistic arguments suggesting a long history of extensive contact and gene flow 
~20,000 – 10,500 ya, along the western edges of the Ethiopian highlands (S87). The 
history of regional interactions between Nilo-Saharans and Cushites 5,000-1000 ya in 
southwestern Sudan and adjacent parts of Uganda and Kenya (S57) were likely to have 
reinforced the genetic patterns observed in the STRUCTURE analyses.  
Our data support the hypothesis based on linguistic, archeological, mtDNA, and Y 
chromosome data, that the Sahel has been a corridor for bi-directional migration between 
eastern and western Africa (S88-90). We observe the highest proportion of the “Nilo-
Saharan AAC” in the southern/central Sudanese populations (Nuer, Dinka, Shilluk, 
Nyimang), with decreasing frequency from northern Kenya (e.g. Pokot) to northern 
Tanzania (Datog, Maasai).  From K = 5-13, all Nilo-Saharan speaking populations from 
Kenya, Tanzania, southern Sudan, and Chad cluster with west-central Afroasiatic Chadic 
speaking populations (Fig. S13).  These results are consistent with linguistic and 
archeological data, suggesting a possible common ancestry of Nilo-Saharan speaking 
populations from an eastern Sudanese homeland within the past ~10,500 years, with 
subsequent bi-directional migration westward to Lake Chad and southward into modern-
day southern Sudan, and more recent migration eastward into Kenya and Tanzania  ~ 
3,000 ya (giving rise to Southern Nilotic speakers) and westward  into Chad ~2,500 ya 
(giving rise to Central Sudanic speakers)( S57, S60, S62, S69). A proposed migration of 
proto-Chadic Afroasiatic speakers ~7,000 ya from the central Sahara into the Lake Chad 
Basin may have caused many western Nilo-Saharans to shift to Chadic languages (S 91).  
Our data suggest that this shift was not accompanied by significant Afroasiatic gene flow.  
 14
Analyses of mtDNA provide evidence for divergence ~8,000 ya of a distinct mtDNA 
lineage present at high frequency in the Chadic populations and suggest an East African 
origin for most mtDNA lineages in these populations (S92) . 
 
Origins of the Fulani, Baggara Arabs, Koma, and Beja 
The Saharan African Beja (Sudan) and Mozabite (Algeria) populations show high 
levels of Middle Eastern/European and eastern African Cushitic AACs (Figs. 3, 4, 5B, 
5C), suggesting possible gene flow from those regions and/or common ancestry. 
Linguistic evidence indicates that the Afroasiatic language family originated in the Horn 
of Africa (S62, S70, S87), consistent with high levels of the Afroasiatic AAC in the Beja 
populations (although the latter observation could also be due to reverse gene flow from 
the Middle East). When the Saharan African populations were analyzed separately, with 
STRUCTURE, the two Beja clan alliances (the Banuamir and the Hadandawa) were 
distinguished (Fig. S20). 
Other groups of interest can be assessed with STRUCTURE analyses, including 
the Fulani, sampled from Nigeria and Cameroon, the Baggara sampled from northern 
Cameroon, and the Koma sampled from the Alantika Mountains in Nigeria. The Fulani 
are nomadic pastoralists who speak a Niger-Kordofanian language (Atlantic 
Senegambian subfamily) and occupy a broad geographic range in central and western 
Africa.  The Fulani show a number of morphological features that have led some 
anthropologists to suggest that they may have originated from East Africa or possibly 
Egypt or the Near East (S93). Mitochondrial DNA analysis indicates that Fulani have 
lineages of predominantly West African origin and that they cluster together and close to 
the Mandenka population from Senegal (S93).  By contrast, Y chromosome analyses of 
Fulani sampled in the Sudan indicates shared ancestry with Nilo-Saharan and Afro-
Asiatic speaking populations (S89).  These results raise the possibility of differential 
patterns of male and female gene flow into this population.  Our analysis, using genome-
wide nuclear markers and STRUCTURE, indicates that the Fulani have distinctive 
ancestry (fuchsia) at K = 14 in the global analysis (Figs. 3,4) and at K = 9 -14 in the 
Africa analysis (Fig. S13). The Fulani cluster with the Chadic and Central Sudanic 
speaking populations at K <13 in the global analysis (Fig. 3; maroon) and at K <8 in the 
Africa analysis (Fig. S13; red).  They also cluster near the Chadic and Central Sudanic 
speaking populations in the NJ tree based on population genetic distances (Fig. 1).  In the 
global STRUCTURE analysis, the Fulani show low to moderate levels of 
European/Middle Eastern ancestry (blue), consistent with mtDNA (S93) and Y 
chromosome (S89) analyses, as well as the presence at low frequency of the -13910 
mutation associated with lactose tolerance in Europeans in this population (S94).  
Additionally, we observe moderate to high levels of Niger- Kordofanian ancestry in the 
Fulani populations (Figs. 3, 4, S13;Tables S8, S9).  These results do not enable us to 
determine the definitive origin of the Fulani, although they indicate shared ancestry with 
Saharan and Central Sudanic populations and suggest that the Fulani have admixed with 
local populations, and possibly adopted a Niger-Kordofanian language, during their 
spread across central and western Africa. The origin of European (possibly via the Iberian 
peninsula) and/or Middle Eastern ancestry in the Fulani requires further exploration with 
additional genetic markers. 
 15
The Baggara (or Baggara Arabs or Shuwa Arabs) are nomadic pastoralists who 
speak an Afroasiatic Semitic language and inhabit regions ranging from southern Sudan 
to Nigeria. They are thought to be descendants of Arab tribes originating from the 
Arabian Peninsula. More specifically, the Baggara trace their ancestry to the Banu 
Judham tribe of Yemen. This tribe was among the first tribes to settle in Egypt during the 
Muslim conquest in mid 7th Century AD (S95) and during the Shiite Fatimid dynasty 
(AD 909 to 1171). After the fall of Fatimid and rise of other subsequent dynasties such as 
the Ayyubid (1171-1250) and Mamluk Turk Sultans of Bahri (1250-1517), they are 
thought to have moved southwest and subsequently settled in present day Chad and then 
subsequently into northern Cameroon and Nigeria within the past 300 years. The earliest 
records of their existence in Chad are from the late 14th century, although they may have 
been there before then (S96-100).  
Consistent with their proposed history of migration from Arabia across eastern 
Africa, southern Sudan, and the Sahel, the Baggara show low levels of Middle 
Eastern/European associated ancestry (blue) and high to moderate levels of Cushitic 
(purple) and Nilo-Saharan (red) associated ancestry in the global and African 
STRUCTURE analyses (Fig. 3, 4, S13). They also show ancestry from the Niger-
Kordofanian, Fulani, and Chadic AACs (Fig. 5B,C), suggesting that they admixed with 
local populations as they migrated westward, consistent with studies of mtDNA (S88). 
These results are consistent with the NJ tree of population genetic distances where they 
cluster near the southern Sudanese and Chadic speaking populations (Fig. 1). 
The Koma, a population previously uncharacterized at the genetic level, who 
currently reside at high elevations in the Alantika mountain range bordering Nigeria and 
Cameroon, speak a Niger-Kordofanian language (sub-classified as Adamawa-Ubangi) 
and descend from populations that retreated into the mountains during the 18th century to 
take refuge during Fulani invasions (S101). In the NJ tree (Fig. 1), they form a clade with 
two Bantu-speaking populations, the Ngumba (from Cameroon) and Baraga (from 
Democratic Republic of Congo), who cluster closely to the southern African Bantu-
speakers. In the African STRUCTURE analysis (Figs. 5B, 5C, S13), the Koma show 
predominantly Niger-Kordofanian ancestry at most K values, but at K = 14 they show 
moderate levels of shared ancestry with the central Sudanic AAC (tan). 
 
Population history of East Africa 
Here we characterize the genetic history of several eastern Africa populations 
whose origin was previously unknown.  It is probable that the observed patterns from the 
STRUCTURE analyses are the result of hypothesized successive waves of migration into 
eastern Africa.  The indigenous populations of East Africa are thought to be the click-
speaking Hadza and Sandawe hunter-gatherers of Tanzania, whose populations may have 
originally extended from Kenya to Somalia and possibly into Ethiopia (S45, S102). The 
first wave of migration is thought to be by Southern Cushitic speakers (ancestral to the 
Iraqw, Gorowa (Fiome), Burunge, and Mbugu), moving south from Ethiopia into Kenya 
and then into Tanzania where they currently reside (S84, S102-104). There are also two 
linguistically attested movements of Eastern Cushitic-speaking forager populations at 
~4,000 and ~2,000 years, originating from a proposed homeland north of Lake Turkana 
into Kenya and Tanzania (Yaaku, El Molo) and four other movements originating from 
southern Ethiopia and extending into northern Kenya (Rendille; Gabra, Borana, and 
 16
Wata; Burji; and Konso) at successive periods from 2500 ya through the present (S57). 
Cushitic peoples since the proto-Cushitic period of ~10,000-9,000 kya practiced 
pastoralism, and at around 7,000 ya began to cultivate grain crops as well (S62). 
Generally accepted archaeological correlations show that the movement of the Southern 
Nilotes (e.g. Kalenjin, Okiek, Datog), south from the present-day Sudan/Ethiopia border 
region into western and central Kenya and subsequently into central northern Tanzania 
took place between ~2900-2400 kya (S57, S103, S104).  These movements took place at 
approximately the same time as the settlement of the early Mashariki Bantu in the Lake 
Victoria and Lake Tanganyika Basins (S84).  The Mashariki Bantu subsequently 
migrated out of these regions across eastern and southeastern Africa between ~2300-1700 
kya (S84). Eastern Nilotes (e.g. Turkana, Samburu, Maasai) represent a more recent 
migration from southern Sudan, within the past ~1500 - 500 years (S57, S102-104). 
These patterns of migration are expected to result in a highly diverse and complex genetic 
structure in East Africa compared to other regions, as we observe.  
Our data also shed light on the history of particular eastern African populations. 
The Mbugu, who live in the Usambara mountain range in eastern Tanzania, speak a 
unique “mixed language” that contains Bantu syntax and Cushitic vocabulary (S45, S83).  
According to oral tradition, the original Mbugu homeland was in Lukupuya, which some 
scholars suggest might have been the Laikipia Plateau in Kenya, where many Maasai 
currently reside (S105).  Their oral history further suggests that they have experienced 
conflict in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries with neighboring Maasai, who 
allegedly stole their cattle, and with the neighboring Pare and Sambaa, with whom they 
eventually reached a peaceful accommodation (S105).   It has been speculated that they 
maintained their indigenous language (which they call Ma’a) in order to maintain their 
cultural identity and distinction from neighboring societies (S 105, S 106).  In our 
STRUCTURE analyses of Africa and East Africa (Figs. 5B, 5C, S13, S14, S17) the 
Mbugu form a distinct AAC (dark purple), but with moderate levels of the Niger-
Kordofanian AAC, consistent with gene flow with neighboring Bantu populations. 
Additionally, we observe evidence for low levels of gene flow from the Mbugu into 
neighboring Bantu speaking Pare and Sambaa populations (with whom they share 
language similarities (S45, S83)).  In the NJ tree of genetic distance between AACs from 
the Africa STRUCTURE analysis (Fig. S16), the Mbugu AAC clusters together with the 
Fulani, Cushitic, and Saharan AACs, consistent with their proposed Cushitic origins.    
The genetic history of the Sandawe is described in the main text. Here we note 
that we see evidence of gene flow from the click-speaking Sandawe into the neighboring 
Cushitic speaking Burunge, and Bantu-speaking Turu (Figs. 3, 4, 5B, 5C, S13, S14, S17), 
consistent with language and technology exchange between these groups (S45, S82, 
S102). 
 
History of East African hunter-gatherer populations 
In addition to the history of the Khoesan-speakers and Pygmies, our data also 
shed light on the population history of several other hunter-gatherer populations in 
Africa, whose subsistence is from hunting small game, foraging for roots and plants, and 
collecting honey. The term Dorobo (considered derogatory) is commonly used by Maasai 
populations to refer to hunter-gatherer populations who have “lost their cattle”. Here, we 
refer to these populations by their self-identified ethnicity, except in the case of a group 
 17
of Dorobo who live near the Maasai in the Ngorongoro district of Tanzania and do not 
have a distinct ethnic affiliation.  The Dorobo (Tanzania), Okiek (Kenya), and Akie 
(Tanzania) are foragers who live near the Maasai and speak the Maasai language, 
although the Okiek also speak several different Kalenjin Southern Nilotic languages of 
their own (S107) and the Akie, too, speak a Kalenjin language that contains loanwords 
from an extinct Rift Southern Cushitic language related to Burunge and Iraqw (S102). 
Some anthropologists have hypothesized that these populations are genetically Maasai 
who no longer raise cattle, while others argue that they are descendants of a more ancient 
group of East African foragers (S103, S108). Our data indicate that the Dorobo cluster 
with the Maasai in the NJ tree of pairwise population genetic distances (Fig. 1) and are 
not distinguishable from the Maasai on the basis of STRUCTURE analysis (Figs. S13 
and S17). The Okiek also cluster near the Maasai and other Nilo-Saharan populations 
from Kenya in the NJ tree (Fig. 1) and are included in the Nilo-Saharan AAC from K = 
2-7 in the STRUCTURE analysis of East Africa (Fig. S17) but form a distinct AAC at K 
= 8 and higher, suggesting that they share common ancestry with Nilo-Saharans but have 
more recently become differentiated.  Interestingly, they cluster with the Mbugu at K = 8, 
perhaps indicating Cushitic ancestry as well.  Therefore, our data and analyses support 
the conclusion that the Dorobo and Okiek are genetically related to Nilo-Saharan 
speaking populations, and that they may have adopted a foraging subsistence pattern. 
However, additional analyses will be required to determine the time of divergence of the 
Okiek from the other Nilo-Saharan speaking (and possibly Cushitic) populations. Indeed, 
linguistic and archaeological evidence suggests that the Okiek have a significant degree 
of cultural continuity back to the Eburran hunter-gatherer populations of 12,000-2,000 
kya in Kenya (S84, S102-104). 
In contrast, the Akie, who have a unique AAC at K = 10 in the East Africa 
STRUCTURE analysis (Fig. S17), appear to share ancestry with neighboring Tanzanians 
at K = 2 – 8 (Fig. S17), and share a distinct AAC at K = 9 with the Eastern Cushitic El 
Molo, who are fishermen on the eastern shore of Lake Turkana in Northern Kenya, and 
with the Eastern Cushitic Yaaku from southern Kenya, who traditionally were foragers 
for honey, plants, and small game (S 108, S 109). The El Molo and Yaaku form a distinct 
AAC at K = 10 and we observe considerable asymmetric gene flow from the Yaaku into 
the neighboring Maasai (Maasaai Mumonyot and Maasai Il’Ngwesi) and Samburu 
populations. Additionally, the Akie cluster close to Cushitic speaking populations, 
including the El Molo and Yaaku, in the NJ tree (Fig. 1). These results are consistent 
with linguistic and archeological data suggesting that the Akie, Yaaku, and El Molo were 
part of an early wave of Cushitic speaking populations into Kenya and Tanzania within 
the past 5,000 years(S 57) who likely practiced a foraging subsistence pattern, and in the 
case of the Akie and Yaaku, more recently adopted a Nilo-Saharan language and/or 
culture (S57, S102-104, S108-110).  The Yaaku in fact adopted the Maasai language only 
in the past 80 years (S108, S109). The Wata (also known as Boni) hunter-gathers from 
northern Kenya, are indistinguishable from neighboring Cushitic agro-pastoralist groups 
such as the Rendille and Borana, suggesting that they have recently adopted a hunting-
gathering subsistence pattern, consistent with oral tradition. We do not find evidence of 
shared ancestry of any of the East African foraging groups with the indigenous Hadza 
and Sandawe populations of Tanzania, suggesting that other East African foraging groups 
were part of more recent migrations into the region. 
 18
 
Common origin of Pygmies and Khoesan-speakers 
Our observation that the Pygmies appear to share common ancestry with several 
Khoesan-speaking populations raises the possibility that the indigenous Pygmy language 
may have contained click consonants. A new examination of the skeletal evidence for the 
development of the human vocal tract indicates that full human language capacity 
evolved before 50 kya but after 100 kya (S111). Considering that the normative directions 
of phonological evolution are from greater to lesser markedness, and that clicks are 
among the most marked of all sounds, the fact that click consonants exist at all in present-
day languages favors their existence back to the earliest human languages of 100-50 kya. 
Some scholars have proposed that the language families of the world can be divided into 
two primary branches (S112). In this view a single extant language family, Khoesan, 
which preserves clicks, is the last representative of one primary branch; all the rest of the 
language families of the world descend from the second branch, the defining 
phonological development of which was the dropping of clicks from the consonant 
inventory (S112). Did the extinct language family or families of the Pygmies belong to 
the same primary branch as Khoesan? The apparent shared ancestry of Pygmies with 
several Khoesan speaking populations suggests that this is a possibility.  It should be 
noted that some linguists have identified words associated with forest terms or with 
hunting that may be shared amongst diverse Pygmy populations and could potentially 
stem from an ancestral indigenous Pygmy language (S113-115).  These words do not 
have click consonants. Future studies may be informative for reconstructing a proto-
Pygmy language and for examining possible connections with modern Khoesan 
languages.  However, because of the limited time depth for resolving language 
phylogenies, it may not be possible to reconstruct such ancient linguistic affiliations.    
Our observation of possible shared common ancestry amongst the SAK, Pygmies, 
and Hadza, who are all short statured, also raises the possibility that short stature may 
have been an ancestral trait rather than a recent adaptation in Pygmies to a tropical 
environment.  Indeed, it is possible that the ancestors of these populations lived in a 
savannah environment, and that Pygmies migrated more recently into the tropical forest.  
However, it is also possible that short stature arose through convergent adaptation in 
these different populations.  Future genome-wide genetic and phenotypic analyses will be 
informative for distinguishing the effects of local adaptation and genetic drift in these 
geographically diverse hunter-gatherer populations.  
 
Gene-language and gene-geography associations 
Any consideration of the relationship of linguistic and genetic diversity must start 
with a major caveat. The spread of languages into new areas does indeed require the 
migration/movement of at least some speakers of the languages. But this number may 
range from a major movement of many individuals into a new region to only a few 
(S116). In addition, it is possible that language shift could occur without genetic 
exchange. One particular linguistic tool, the study of word borrowing patterns between 
two languages over a sustained period of time, may have particular utility in generating 
predictions about the relative proportions of the populations involved in histories of 
language shift (S86).  The predictive capacities of this type of evidence have already 
 19
received mention above with respect to the Khoekhoe demic components in South 
African Bantu-speaking societies (S85).   
In most cases, we observed a strong correlation between genetic clustering and 
language classification, consistent with prior studies (S116-119). However, we found 
several exceptions. In these cases, the word-borrowing histories show that the former 
language of the majority of the population typically did fit with the genetic clustering.  
For example, in the NJ tree (Fig. 1), Afroasiatic speakers cluster into four primary clades, 
which correlate with geography; one clade consists of Semitic-speaking and Berber-
speaking populations in the Sahara, a second consists of Cushitic-speaking populations 
from southern Ethiopia/Northern Kenya, a third consists of Southern Cushitic-speaking 
populations from Kenya and Tanzania, and a fourth consists of Chadic-speaking 
populations from northern Cameroon and Chad. The Afroasiatic Chadic speaking 
populations from Northern Cameroon cluster close to the Nilo-Saharan-speaking 
populations from southern Sudan and Chad, rather than with East African Afroasiatic 
speakers, consistent with STRUCTURE results (Figs. 5B, 5C, S13, S14). The result 
conforms to the linguistic evidence of notable Nilo-Saharan loanword sets in the Chadic 
languages of the types that imply a shift of former Nilo-Saharan-speaking populations to 
Chadic languages (S91).  The Hausa, who speak a Chadic Afroasiatic language cluster 
with the Niger-Kordofanian speaking populations in the NJ tree (Fig. 1), consistent with 
the high levels of Chadic and Niger-Kordofanian AACs observed in this population on 
the basis of STRUCTURE analysis (Figs. 3, 4, S13, S22) and in keeping with long-
recognized linguistic evidence of Niger-Kordofanian influence on the Hausa, including 
several salient loanwords, such as the word for meat (S120). The Dogon from Mali, who 
speak a Niger-Kordofanian language, cluster with the Saharan and eastern Africans in the 
NJ tree (Fig. 1), consistent with the results from STRUCTURE analysis, showing 
considerable Saharan (blue) and Afroasiatic  (purple) ancestry, and consistent with oral 
history of a northern African origin (although it should be noted that the sample size for 
this population, 9 individuals, is very small and many markers did not amplify well) (Fig. 
S13; Table S9).  The linguistic evidence remains to be studied in this case. 
Regression analyses of linguistic, geographic, and genetic distance are given in 
the main text.  Here we note that co-linearity between geographic and linguistic distance 
could confound interpretation of results.  Specifically, for the Cushitic only analyses we 
found that both linguistic distance and geographic distance explain a significant portion 
of the genetic variance (0.27 and 0.29, respectively; p <0.0001 for both). However, in the 
analysis that adjusts geographic distance for language the p value increases to 0.67, but 
language distance remains a significant factor after adjusting for geography. This result is 
consistent with the co-linearity of geography and language found in this group. In 
contrast, we did not find evidence for high levels of co-linearity in the other language 
families.   
 
Genetic ancestry of African Americans  
Ancestry from multiple global populations was detected in both the African 
American and CMA populations.  In contrast to prior studies of African American 
ancestry that focused on uniparentally inherited mtDNA or Y chromosome markers 
(S121-123), or on nuclear markers genotyped in a small subset of Africans (S121, S124, 
S125), the current study infers African American ancestry across the nuclear genome by 
 20
comparison with 121 geographically and ethnically diverse African populations and an 
extensive sample of 60 non-African populations. In African American populations, from 
Chicago, Baltimore, Pittsburgh, and North Carolina, ancestry was predominantly from 
the African Niger-Kordofanian AAC (means 0.69-0.74), which is most common in 
western Africa, and the European/Middle Eastern AAC (means 0.11-0.15) (Fig. 6 and 
Table S6), consistent with prior studies (S121-125).  This result is also consistent with 
the history of the slave trade, indicating that most slaves reached North America, often 
via the Carribean, ultimately from the western coasts of Africa (S126). Low levels of 
ancestry from several additional populations were also detected (Table S6):  Fulani 
(means 0.0 - 0.03, individual range 0.00-0.14), Cushitic East African (means 0.02, 
individual range 0.05 - 0.10), Sandawe East African (means 0.01- 0.03, individual range 
0.00 - 0.12), East Asian (means 0.01 – 0.02, individual range 0.0 - 0.08), and Indian 
(means 0.04 – 0.06, individual range 0.01 -0.17).  The Fulani are present across West 
Africa and, therefore, would be expected to have contributed to the slave trade, and the 
Cushitic and Sandawe ancestry could represent slave trade originating from the east coast 
of Africa (S126).  It should be noted that the levels of Indian ancestry in African 
Americans may be slightly overestimated, and the levels of European ancestry slightly 
underestimated, due to moderate levels of the Indian AAC in European/Middle Eastern 
individuals (Figs. 3 and 4).  We did not observe significant levels of Native American 
ancestry.  However, other regions of the US, may reveal Native American Ancestry, as 
previously reported (S125).  Finally, European and African ancestry levels varied 
considerably among individuals (Fig. 6).   
 
Origins of the Cape Mixed Ancestry population 
Based on unsupervised STRUCTURE analysis, this population shows nearly 
equal high levels of southern African Khoesan (mean 0.25, individual range 0.01-0.48), 
Niger-Kordofanian (mean 0.19, individual range 0.01 - 0.71), Indian (mean 0.20, 
individual range 0.0 - 0.69), and European (mean 0.19, individual range 0.0 - 0.86) 
ancestry (Fig. 6; Table S6).  The CMA population also has low levels of East Asian 
(mean 0.08, individual range 0.0 – 0.21) and Cushitic (mean 0.03, individual range 0.0 – 
0.40) ancestry. These results  are consistent with the history of the CMA population, 
which is thought to have descended from the indigenous Khoekhoe (Khoesan-speaking 
herders), and admixed initially with European Dutch “Afrikaaner” colonialists from 1652 
up to the present as well as with Bantu-speaking slaves from West Africa and 
Mozambique, and with Austronesian-speaking slaves from Madagascar and Indonesia 
during the 18th and early 19th centuries (S127, S128).  Additionally, there were many 
Indian and a few Chinese in the Capetown area, from the 1860s onward, who are thought 
to have contributed to CMA ancestry (S127).  These results are consistent with the 
supervised STRUCTURE analysis, using the same set of training populations as was used 
for determining African American ancestry (Table S7).   As expected, the proportion of 
Bantu Niger-Kordofanian ancestry (mean 0.10) is higher than the proportion of non-
Bantu Niger-Kordofanian ancestry (mean 0.04) in the CMA. 
 
The genetic, linguistic, and geographic landscape of Africa 
A number of factors could have contributed to isolation and differentiation of 
populations in Africa, including climatic fluctuations such as an extreme dry spell from 
 21
~60,000 – 30,000 ya (S129), the cold and dry last glacial maximum in Africa, ~21K – 15 
kya, followed at ~13,700 – 12,300 ya by another period of cooler and drier conditions 
(S85).  Indeed, the period of diversification of the major African language families is 
thought to date back to ~15K – 11 kya .  Differentiation and expansion of ancestral 
African populations across Africa from regions of refugia, such as the Ethiopian 
highlands, may have occurred during the interludes of these cold and dry periods (S85).  
Additionally, based on the archeological record, expansion and differentiation of African 
populations during the later stages of the African Middle Stone Age (MSA), from 
~75,000 – 55,000 years ago, may have coincided with the origin and spread of radically 
new technological developments, including new patterns of blade technology, tools used 
for skin working and for cutting bone and wood, and stone barbs using for hunting and 
fishing as well long distance trade of shell ornamentation and red ochre engraved with 
unique decorative patterns interpreted as “abstract art” (S129-131). Analyses of 
nucleotide and haplotype variation in Africans will be informative for estimating the age 
of the inferred ancestral clusters and for distinguishing genetic similarity due to common 
ancestry or gene flow.   
Niger -  Kordofanian
Afroasiatic
Nilo - Saharan
Khoesan
: Geographic distribution of 121 African populations included in the current study. Populations are
color-coded according to language classification. Stars indicate samples from the Centre d’Etude du Polymorphisme
Humain (CEPH) human genome diversity panel (HGDP) (S4-6, S24).
Figure S1 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
N
tu
m
u
B
ak
a
B
u r
un
g e
B
ak
ol
a
S
an
S
uk
um
a
Ti
k a
rN
or
th
Y
ak
om
a
G
og
o
M
v a
e
B
an
tu
S
ou
th
C
M
A
S
an
da
w
e
B
an
en
I y
as
sa
M
ab
ea
V
en
da
B
ul
u
B
ed
za
n
Lu
hy
a
M
bu
g w
e
C
hi
ca
g o
B
ia
ka
Le
m
an
d e
Tu
ru
B
at
i e
I g
al
a
B
al
tim
or
e
Zi
m
e
K
an
em
bo
u
Ig
bo
Y
a m
ba
ss
a
B
af
i a
R
an
gi
D
io
ul
a
D
at
og
K
on
g o
B
ar
eg
a
Lu
o
S
am
bu
ru
G
ba
ya
B
ur
ji
N
or
th
C
ar
ol
in
a
Ti
ka
rS
ou
th
B
a m
ou
n
B
al
ub
a
H
ad
za
Tu
pu
ri
P
ar
e
K
an
u r
i
B
at
an
g a
Fa
ng
X
ho
sa
La
ka
Y
or
ub
a
C
E
P
H
E
w
on
do
K
ab
a
W
a f
io
m
e
B
an
tu
K
en
ya
M
aa
sa
iT
an
za
ni
a
S
am
ba
'a
Fu
la
ni
N
ig
er
ia
M
bu
gu
W
im
bu
m
G
w
ar
i
N
gu
m
ba
O
ul
de
m
e
B
ro
ng
B
ul
al
a
K
ik
uy
u
P
itt
sb
ur
gh
T u
rk
an
a
N
an
di
M
ad
a
Tu
ge
n
K
ot
ok
o
A
sh
an
ti
Y
o r
ub
a
H
au
sa
N
ig
er
ia
D
or
ob
o
Y
aa
ku
N
ga
m
ba
ye
S
ab
ao
t
M
aa
sa
i
G
ab
ra
M
ar
ak
w
et
M
aa
sa
i I
l'n
gw
es
i
B
as
s a
ng
e
G
i z
ig
a
H
au
sa
M
an
da
ra
M
aa
sa
i I
lc
ha
m
us
M
an
di
nk
a
S
ar
a
va
r io
us
!X
un
/K
ho
e
Ira
qw
K
on
so
M
as
s a
E
lM
ol
o
Fu
la
ni
A
da
m
a w
a
M
bu
m
S
hu
w
a
M
bu
ti
B
or
an
a
S
en
gw
er
R
en
di
ll e
P
od
ok
w
o
W
at
a
K
om
a
A
ki
e
Fu
la
ni
M
bo
r o
ro
S
hi
llu
k
O
k i
e k
N
ue
r
Zu
lg
o
B
et
a 
Is
r a
el
B
ej
a
H
ad
an
da
w
a
B
ej
a
B
an
ua
m
i r
N
yi
m
an
g
T u
t s
i /H
ut
u
P
ok
ot
D
in
k a
M
o z
ab
it e
B
ed
ou
in
B
al
oc
hi
P
al
es
t in
ia
n
H
in
di
P
a t
ha
n
K
an
na
d a
P
un
ja
bi
Te
m
an
i
M
ak
ra
ni
U
yg
ur
T e
lu
g u
S
in
dh
i
T a
m
il
H
az
a r
a
K
as
hm
i ri
B
ra
hu
i
A
dy
ge
i
B
en
ga
l i
D
ru
z e
A
ss
am
es
e
P
ar
s i
O
r iy
a
K
on
ka
ni
M
ar
at
hi
Ita
lia
n
D
au
r
B
ur
u s
ho
O
rc
ad
ia
n
F r
en
ch
X
ib
o
M
ar
a w
ar
i
M
al
a y
al
a m
R
us
si
an
G
uj
ar
at
S
ar
di
ni
an
Y
ak
ut
B
as
qu
e
C
am
bo
di
an
A
us
tra
lia
n
D
og
o n
K
al
as
h Tu
M
on
go
lia
n
N
ax
i
T u
jia
H
an
J a
pa
ne
se D
ai
H
ez
he
n Y
i
S
he
O
ro
qe
n
La
hu
M
ia
o
M
ay
a
M
el
an
es
ia
n
P
ap
ua
n
C
ol
u m
bi
an
P
i m
a
K
ar
it i
an
a
S
ur
u i
Populations
Th
et
a
(V
)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
G
og
o
B
ur
un
ge
Tu
ru
S
uk
um
a
B
al
t im
o r
e
S
an
da
w
e
R
an
g i
N
or
t h
C
ar
ol
in
a
M
aa
sa
iT
an
z a
ni
a
P
itt
sb
ur
g h
M
bu
gw
e
K
ik
uy
u
C
hi
ca
go
B
ia
ka
W
a f
io
m
e
B
ul
u
N
tu
m
u
Zi
m
e
B
ak
ol
a
M
va
e
B
ak
a
D
or
ob
o
Lu
o
Lu
hy
a
X
ho
sa
Ti
k a
rS
ou
t h
S
am
bu
ru
B
an
tu
S
ou
th
M
ab
ea
G
ba
ya
Tu
ts
i/H
ut
u
N
an
di
S
am
ba
'a
N
gu
m
ba
K
ab
a
W
at
a
Fu
la
ni
N
ig
er
ia
B
ur
ji
K
on
s o
P
ar
e
Ti
k a
rN
o r
t h
S
ab
ao
t
D
io
ul
a
B
at
i e
Ira
qw
Iy
as
sa
Y
o r
ub
a
C
E
P
H
B
af
ia
S
hu
w
a
Le
m
an
de
La
ka
I g
bo
K
on
go
K
an
em
bo
u
M
aa
sa
i I
l c
ha
m
us
M
aa
sa
i I
l'n
gw
es
i
E
w
on
do
D
at
og
H
au
sa
A
ki
e
B
an
e n
B
a m
ou
n
M
aa
sa
i
B
or
an
a
B
at
an
ga
K
an
ur
i
Tu
rk
an
a
Fa
ng
B
al
ub
a
B
ed
za
n
Y
am
ba
ss
a
G
ab
ra
N
ga
m
ba
ye
M
an
da
ra
I g
al
a
G
iz
ig
a
V
en
da
M
bu
m
W
im
bu
m
S
en
gw
er
A
sh
an
ti
Tu
pu
ri
B
ro
ng
S
ar
a
v a
rio
us
!X
un
/K
ho
e
Tu
ge
n
Y
ak
om
a
F u
la
ni
A
da
m
aw
a
B
an
tu
K
en
ya
G
w
ar
i
Y
or
ub
a
K
ot
ok
o
B
as
s a
ng
e
O
ul
de
m
e
P
ok
ot
R
en
di
lle
H
au
s a
N
ig
er
i a
B
ar
eg
a
B
ul
al
a
M
an
di
n k
a
M
ad
a
Y
aa
ku
B
e t
a 
Is
r a
el
M
as
sa
M
bu
gu
M
a r
ak
w
e t
P
od
ok
w
o
N
yi
m
an
g
Zu
lg
o
E
lM
ol
o
M
bu
ti
B
ej
a
B
an
ua
m
ir
D
in
k a
O
k i
ek
S
hi
llu
k
B
ej
a
H
ad
an
da
w
a
N
ue
r
K
om
a
S
an
F u
la
ni
M
bo
r o
ro
M
oz
ab
i te
H
ad
za
M
ak
r a
ni
B
ed
ou
in
K
as
h m
iri
P
al
es
tin
ia
n
P
at
ha
n
S
in
dh
i
B
al
oc
hi
Ita
lia
n
M
ar
at
h i
R
us
si
a n
U
yg
ur
P
un
ja
bi
B
ra
hu
i
T a
m
i l
K
an
na
da
A
dy
ge
i
B
ur
us
h o
A
ss
am
es
e
O
ri y
a
F r
en
c h
B
en
ga
li
P
ar
si
H
az
ar
a
H
in
di
M
al
ay
al
am
O
r c
ad
ia
n
T e
lu
gu
T e
m
an
i
D
r u
ze
K
on
ka
ni
G
uj
ar
at
S
ar
di
ni
a n
M
a r
aw
ar
i
B
as
qu
e
A
us
tra
lia
n
M
on
go
lia
n
D
au
r
Tu
X
ib
o
Y
ak
ut
C
a m
bo
di
an
K
al
as
h
H
an Y
i
M
ia
o
H
ez
he
n
Ja
pa
ne
se
N
ax
i
T u
jia
O
ro
qe
n
D
ai
S
he
La
hu
M
ay
a
P
ap
ua
n
D
og
on
M
el
an
es
ia
n
C
ol
um
bi
an
P
i m
a
K
ar
it i
an
a
S
ur
u i
Populations
Th
et
a
(H
)
African European/Middle Eastern Indian East Asian Oceanian Native American
African European/Middle Eastern Indian East Asian Oceanian Native American
A
B
C
M
A
Figure S2
-2
2.
5
-1
5 .
0
-7
.5 0.
0
7.
5
15
.0
22
.5
30
.0
37
.5
45
.0
52
.5
60
.0
67
.5
75
.0
82
.5
90
.0
97
.5
10
5.
0
11
2.
5
12
0.
0
12
7.
5
13
5.
0
14
2.
5
15
0.
0
15
7.
5
16
5.
0
17
2.
5
18
0.
0
18
7.
5
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
-40
C
7.25-7.5
7-7.25
6.75-7
6.5-6.75
6.25-6.5
6-6.25
5.75-6
5.5-5.75
5.25-5.5
5-5.25
4.75-5
4.5-4.75
4.25-4.5
4-4.25
3.75-4
3.5-3.75
3.25-3.5
3-3.25
2.75-3
2.5-2.75
2.25-2.5
2-2.25
1.75-2
1.5-1.75
1.25-1.5
1-1.25
0.75-1
0.5-0.75
0.25-0.5
0-0.25
Theta(V)
Figure S2 : Comparison of genetic diversity (θ) A) from microsatellite allele size variance, B) from heterozygosity. Pygmy, 
San, Hadza, and Sandawe hunter gatherer populations are highlighted in larger font, and C) Estimated levels of θ by using 
 a linear regression weighted by geographic distance away from each point of evaluation.  
 
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
Tu
ts
i/H
ut
u
Tu
ru
P
itt
sb
ur
gh
G
og
o
M
aa
sa
iT
an
za
ni
a
K
i k
uy
u
N
o r
th
C
a r
ol
in
a
R
an
gi
B
al
ti m
or
e
W
at
a
W
af
io
m
e
D
or
ob
o
B
ur
un
ge
K
on
so
S
an
da
w
e
S
u k
um
a
M
bu
gw
e
C
M
A
C
hi
ca
g o
B
i a
ka
Ira
q w
X
ho
sa
S
hu
w
a
N
an
d i
A
ki
e
S
ab
ao
t
B
ul
u
Lu
o
N
gu
m
b a
Zi
m
e
T i
ka
rS
ou
th
S
am
ba
'a
S
am
bu
ru
B
or
an
a
Fu
la
ni
N
ig
er
ia
K
ab
a
M
aa
sa
i I
lc
ha
m
us
H
au
sa
G
ba
ya
M
aa
sa
iI
l'n
gw
es
i
Lu
hy
a
P
ar
e
B
u r
ji
M
aa
sa
i
M
v a
e
S
en
g w
e r
M
bu
m
P
ok
ot
Y
or
ub
a
C
E
P
H
M
ab
e a
La
ka
D
io
u l
a
M
an
da
ra
G
ab
ra
E
w
on
d o
N
tu
m
u
B
an
tu
S
ou
th
Tu
rk
an
a
N
ga
m
ba
ye
B
ak
ol
a
S
ar
a
va
rio
us
G
iz
ig
a
!X
un
/ K
ho
e
B
at
ie
B
af
ia
Fu
la
n i
A
da
m
aw
a
K
on
go
B
at
an
ga
B
ak
a
D
at
og
Ig
bo
B
et
a
Is
ra
el
K
an
ur
i
B
am
ou
n
Fa
ng
A
sh
an
t i
K
an
em
bo
u
Le
m
an
de
R
en
d i
lle
Tu
ge
n
W
im
bu
m
B
al
ub
a
Iy
as
s a
B
ro
ng
B
as
sa
ng
e
T i
ka
rN
or
t h
Y
or
ub
a
N
yi
m
an
g
Y
a m
ba
ss
a
K
ot
ok
o
Tu
pu
r i
M
as
sa
G
w
ar
i
B
an
e n
M
an
di
n k
a
B
an
tu
K
en
ya
Z u
l g
o
B
ed
za
n
Ig
a l
a
H
au
sa
N
ig
er
i a
O
u l
de
m
e
D
i n
k a
P
od
ok
w
o
Y
aa
k u
B
ej
a
B
an
ua
m
ir
M
ad
a
M
ar
a k
w
et
B
ul
al
a
V
en
da
E
lM
ol
o
M
bu
gu
O
ki
e k
M
bu
ti
B
ej
a
S
hi
llu
k
B
ar
eg
a
Y
ak
om
a
N
ue
r
M
ak
ra
ni
K
om
a
K
a s
hm
iri
M
oz
ab
i te
R
us
si
an
Ita
lia
n
S
in
dh
i
Fu
la
n i
M
bo
ro
ro
M
ar
at
hi
P
al
es
tin
ia
n
P
at
ha
n
Fr
en
c h
B
ur
us
ho
B
ed
ou
in
B
ra
hu
i
O
riy
a
U
yg
u r
M
al
ay
a l
a m
B
al
oc
hi
A
d y
ge
i
P
un
j a
bi
A
ss
am
es
e
Ta
m
il
O
rc
ad
ia
n
B
en
ga
li
P
ar
si
K
an
na
da
G
uj
ar
a t
S
ar
di
ni
a n
H
az
ar
a
M
ar
aw
ar
i
H
in
di
S
an
D
ru
ze
Te
l u
gu
K
on
ka
ni
Te
m
an
i
H
ad
za
A
us
tr a
lia
n
B
a s
qu
e
M
on
go
l a Tu
M
ia
o
H
an
D
au
r Y
i
K
al
as
h
C
am
bo
d i
an
Y
ak
ut
X
i b
o
H
e z
he
n
O
ro
qe
n
Ja
pa
ne
s e
T u
ji a
N
a x
i
S
he D
ai
La
h u
P
ap
ua
n
M
ay
a
M
el
an
es
ia
n
C
ol
u m
bi
a n
P
im
a
D
og
on
K
ar
it i
an
a
S
ur
ui
Populations
R
at
io
Va
r/H
et
African European/Middle Eastern Indian East Asian Oceanian Native American
Figure S3: Ratio of genetic diversity (θ) inferred from the sample variance in repeat length of the microsatellite alleles to that from 
heterozygosity (Het) 
Var vs Het
Zulgo
Zime
Yoruba CEPH
Yoruba
Yi
Yambassa
Yakut
Yakoma
Yaak
Xibo
XhosaWimbum
Wata
Wafiome
Venda
Uygur
Tutsi/Hutu
Turu
Turkana
Tupuri
Tujia
T gen
Tu
Tikar South
Tikar North
TemaniTeluguTamil
Surui
Sukuma
Sindhi
ShuwaShilook
She
Sengwer
Sardinian
Sara various
Sandawe
San
S mburu
Samba'aSabaot
Russian
Rendille
Rangi
Punjabi
Pokot
Podokwo
Pittsburgh
Pima
P than
Parsi
Pare
Papuan
Palestinian
Oulde e
Oroqen
OriyaOrcadian
OgiekNyiamanNuer
Ntumu
North Carolina
NgumbNgambaye
Naxi
Nandi
Mvae
Mozabite
Mongola
Miao
Melanesian
Mbuti Mbum
Mbugwe
Mb gu
Maya
Massa
MarawariMarathi
Mar kwetMandenkMandara
M layalam
Makrani
Mada
Mabea
Ma i Tanzania
M asai MumonyotMa sai Il'ngwesi
Lu
LuhyaLemande
Laka
Lahu
K toko
Konso
Konkani
Kongo
Koma
Kikuyu
Kashmiri
Karitiana
Kanuri
Kann da
Kanembou
Kalash
Ka
Japanese
Iyass
Italian
IraqwIlcha us
IgboIg la
Hi di
Hezhen
Haz ra
Hausa NigeriaHaus  Ca eroon
Han
Hadza Gwari
Gujar t
Gogo
Gizig
Gbaya
Ga r
F lani Nigeria
Fulani Mbororo F lani Adamawa
French
F gEwondo
El Molo
Druze
D robo
Dogon
Dioul
Dinka
Daur
D to a
Dai
Columbian
ChicagoC pe To n
Cambodian
Burusho
Burunge
B rji
Bulu
B lalaBrong
Brahui
Borana
iaka
Beta Israel
Bengali
Beja Hadand waBeja B uamir
Bedzan
Bedouin
Batie
Batang
B ss nge
Basque
Barega
Bantu South
Bantu Keny
Banen
Bamounluba Baltimo e
Balochi
BakolaBaka
Bafi
Australian
Assamese
Ash ti
Akie
Adyg i
!Xun/Kx e
R2 = 0.927
3
4
5
6
7
8
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10Het
Va
r
Var vs Het
Zulgo
Zime
Yoruba CEPH
Yoruba
Yambassa
Yakoma
Yaaku
Xhosa
Wimbum
Wata
Wafiome
Venda
Tutsi/Hutu
Turu
Turkana
Tupuri
Tugen
Tikar South
Tikar North Sukuma
Shuwa
Shilook
Sengwer
Sara various
Sandawe
San
Samburu
Samba'a
Sabaot
Rendille
Rangi
Pokot
Podokwo
Pittsburgh
Pare
Palestinian
Ouldeme
Ogiek
Nyiaman
Nuer
Ntumu
North Carolina
Ngumba
Ngambaye
Nandi
Mvae
Mozabite
Mbuti Mbum
Mbugwe
Mbugu
Massa
Marakwet
Mandenka Mandara
Mada
Mabea
Maasai Tanzania
M asai MumonyotMaasai Il'ngwesi
Luo
LuhyaLemande
Laka
Kotoko
Konso
Kongo
Koma
Kikuy
Kanuri
Kanembou
Kaba
Iyassa
Iraqw
Ilchamus
Igbo
Igala
Hausa Nigeria
Haus  C eroon
Hadza
Gwari
Gogo
Giziga
Gb ya
Gabra
Fulani Nigeria
Fulani Mbororo
Fulani Adamawa
FangEwondo
El Molo
Dorobo
Dioula
Dinka
Dato a
Chica o
Cape To n
Burunge
Burji
Bulu
Bulala Brong
Borana
Biaka
Beta IsraelBeja HadandawaBeja Banuamir
Bedzan
Bedouin
Batie
Batanga
Bassange
Barega
Bantu South
Bantu Kenya
Banen
BamounBaluba
Baltimore
Balochi
Bakola
Baka
Bafia
Ashanti
Akie
!Xun/Kx e
R2 = 0.927
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
6.0 6.5 7.0 7.5 8.0 8.5 9.0 9.5
Het
Va
r
A
B
Figure S4: Correlations between genetic diversity (θ) inferred from the sample variance in repeat length of the 
 microsatellite alleles (Var) and from heterozygosity (Het). A) Comparisons of the two measures of genetic diversity 
 for all studied populations, and B) A blowup of populations with higher levels of diversity from the upper right hand 
 corner of panel A. 
  
Theta(Var)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
3.2 6.4 6.6 6.8 7.0 7.2 7.4 7.6 7.8 8.0 8.2 8.4 8.6 8.8 9.0 9.2
Eastern Africa
Central Africa
Southern Africa
Western Africa
Saharan Africa
Theta(H)
region
0
50
100
150
200
250
Eastern Africa
Central Africa
Southern Africa
Western Africa
Saharan Africa
region
Theta(Var)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Theta(H)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
5.6 6.3 6.4 6.5 6.6 6.7 6.8 6.9 7 7.1 7.2 7.3
Farmers
Hunter-Gatherers
Herders
Mixed Farmers
Theta(Var)
subsistence
5.6 6.3 6.4 6.5 6.6 6.7 6.8 6.9 7 7.1 7.2 7.3
3.2 6.4 6.6 6.8 7.0 7.2 7.4 7.6 7.8 8.0 8.2 8.4 8.6 8.8 9.0 9.2
0
50
100
150
200
250
5.6 6.3 6.4 6.5 6.6 6.7 6.8 6.9 7 7.1 7.2 7.3
Afroasiatic
Khoesan
Niger-Congo
Nilo-Saharan
Pygmy
language
Theta(Var)
0
50
100
150
200
250
3.2 6.4 6.6 6.8 7.0 7.2 7.4 7.6 7.8 8.0 8.2 8.4 8.6 8.8 9.0 9.2
Afroasiatic
Khoesan
Niger-Congo
Nilo-Saharan
Pygmy
language
Theta(H)
n
n
n
n
n
n
A
B
C
D
E
F
Farmers
Hunter-Gatherers
Herders
Mixed Farmers
subsistence
Figure S5: Genetic diversity (θ) from the sample variance in repeat length of the microsatellite alleles (A – C)  
and heterozygosity (D – F) for populations sorted by language classification (A, D), geographic location (B, E),  
and subsistence patterns (C,F).  
Private Alleles by Region
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Sample size (g)
M
ea
n
nu
m
be
ro
fp
riv
at
e
al
le
le
s
pe
rl
oc
us
Africa
Central_Asia
Middle_East
Eastern_Asia
India
Oceania
Europe
Americas
A
Uniquely Shared Alleles between Africa and other regions
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.11
0.12
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Sample size (g)
M
ea
n
nu
m
be
ro
fs
ha
re
d
a l
le
le
s
pe
rl
o c
u s
Africa / Central_Asia
Africa / Middle_East
Africa / Eastern_Asia
Africa / India
Africa / Oceania
Africa / Europe
Africa / Americas
Figure S6
B
Uniquely Shared Alleles between Subregions
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.15
0.16
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Sample size (g)
M
ea
n
nu
m
be
ro
fs
ha
re
d
al
le
le
s
pe
rl
oc
us
Eastern_Africa / Central_Africa
Eastern_Africa / Western_Africa
Eastern_Africa / Southern_Africa
Eastern_Africa / Saharan_Africa
Central_Africa / Western_Africa
Central_Africa / Southern_Africa
Central_Africa / Saharan_Africa
Western_Africa / Southern_Africa
Western_Africa / Saharan_Africa
Southern_Africa / Saharan_Africa
Private Alleles by African subregions
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Sample size (g)
M
ea
n
nu
m
be
ro
fp
riv
at
e
al
le
le
s
pe
rl
oc
us
Eastern_Africa
Central_Africa
Western_Africa
Southern_Africa
Saharan_Africa
C
D
Figure S6: Inference of number of private and shared alleles across regions with the ADZE program (S21). This method  
estimates the number of alleles found in each of a set of populations but absent in all remaining populations, considering  
equal-sized sub-samples from each population. A) Number of private alleles by major geographic regions B). Uniquely  
shared alleles between Africa and other regions. C) Number of private alleles within African sub-regions. D) Uniquely 
shared alleles between African sub-regions. 
Africa Central Asia
East Asia
0 .00
0 .20
0 .40
0 .60
0 .80
1 .00
1 .20
1 .40
1 .60
0 1 ,000 2 ,000 3 ,000 4 ,000 5 ,000 6 ,000 7 ,000 8 ,000
Geographic Distance (km)
δμ
2
0 .00
0 .02
0 .04
0 .06
0 .08
0 .10
0 .12
0 .14
0 .16
0 .18
0 .20
0 500 1 ,000 1 ,500 2 ,000 2 ,500
Geographic Distance (km)
δ μ
2
0 .00
0 .10
0 .20
0 .30
0 .40
0 .50
0 .60
0 1 ,000 2 ,000 3 ,000 4 ,000 5 ,000 6 ,000 7 ,000 8 ,000
Geographic Distance (km)
δμ
2
IndiaEurope
Middle East
0 .00
0 .05
0 .10
0 .15
0 .20
0 .25
0 .30
0 .35
0 .40
0 1 ,000 2 ,000 3 ,000 4 ,000 5 ,000 6 ,000
Geographic Distance (km)
δμ
2
0 .00
0 .10
0 .20
0 .30
0 .40
0 .50
0 .60
0 1 ,000 2 ,000 3 ,000 4 ,000 5 ,000 6 ,000
Geographic Distance (km)
δμ
2
0 .00
0 .05
0 .10
0 .15
0 .20
0 .25
0 .30
0 500 1 ,000 1 ,500 2 ,000 2 ,500 3 ,000
Geographic Distance (km)
δμ
2
Figure S7: Geographic distance between populations (km) versus pairwise (δμ)2 genetic distances between populations for each 
major geographic region. We observe a linear correlation between geographic and genetic distance as expected under an isolation by 
distance model. The largest correlations (Spearman ρ) were observed in Europe (ρ= 0.83), the Middle East (ρ= 0.88) and in Africa 
(ρ= 0.40) (Table S5). 
0 .00
0 .20
0 .40
0 .60
0 .80
1 .00
1 .20
1 .40
1 .60
0 1 ,000 2 ,000 3 ,000 4 ,000 5 ,000 6 ,000 7 ,000 8 ,000
Geographic Distance (km)
δμ
2
Africa
Figure S8: Great circle geographic distance (km) versus pairwise genetic distances (δμ)2  between populations within Africa. 
Generally speaking, we observe a linear correlation between geographic and genetic distance as expected under an isolation by 
distance model 
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
1.40
1.60
0 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500 4,000
Geographic Distance (km)
δμ
2
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
1.40
1.60
0 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500 4,00
Geographic Distance (km)
δμ
2
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
1.40
1.60
0 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500 4,000
Geographic Distance (km)
δμ
2
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
1.40
1.60
0 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500 4,000
Geographic Distance (km)
δμ
2
Saharan Africa
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
1.40
1.60
0 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500 4,000
Geographic Distance (km)
δμ
2
Eastern Africa
Central Africa
Western Africa
Southern Africa
Figure S9: Great circle geographic distance (km) versus pairwise genetic distances (δμ)2 between populations within each major
geographic region of Africa. The largest correlations (Spearman ρ) were observed in Saharan Africa (ρ= 0.76) and the smallest in
East Africa (ρ= 0.19) (Table S4).
0
Figure S10:  Secondary Modes for STRUCTURE analysis (29) for K = 9 – 14 for the global population dataset.  
-11,400,000
-11,300,000
-11,200,000
-11,100,000
-11,000,000
-10,900,000
-10,800,000
-10,700,000
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Global 
Figure S11:   Likelihood scores for 25 STRUCTURE runs for the global set of samples for K = 2 - 15 
Hadza AAC
Fulani AAC
Oceanian AAC
Native American AAC
European AAC
East Asian AAC
Indian AAC
Cushitic AAC
Nilo-Saharan AAC
Chadic-Saharan AAC
W. Pygmy AAC
Southern African Khoesan/Mbuti AAC
Niger-Kordofanian AAC
Sandawe AAC
Figure S12: Un-rooted neighbor-joining tree based on pairwise nucleotide genetic distances using inferred ancestral 
allele frequencies from the global STRUCTURE analysis at K = 14. 
Figure S13: STRUCTURE analysis of the African dataset only (121 populations) with all genetic data (848 microsatellites, 
476 indels and 3 SNPs) from K = 2 - 14. Each vertical line represents an individual. Individuals are clustered by self-
identified ethnic group (shown at bottom) and ethnic groups are clustered by major geographic region. The colors represent 
the proportion of inferred ancestry from K ancestral populations. Values for K are shown on the left and the number of 
similar runs (F) for the primary mode for each set of 25 STRUCTURE runs at each K value is shown on the right. 
Figure S14: Secondary Modes for STRUCTURE for K = 4 – 14 for the African population dataset. Values for K are shown 
on the left and the number of similar runs (F) for the primary mode for each set of 25 STRUCTURE runs at each K value is 
shown on the right. 
-7 ,500,000
-7 ,450,000
-7 ,400,000
-7 ,350,000
-7 ,300,000
-7 ,250,000
-7 ,200,000
-7 ,150,000
-7 ,100,000
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
b)
-9 ,000,000
-8 ,800,000
-8 ,600,000
-8 ,400,000
-8 ,200,000
-8 ,000,000
-7 ,800,000
-7 ,600,000
-7 ,400,000
-7 ,200,000
-7 ,000,000
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
a)
Africa
Figure S15: Likelihood scores for 25 STRUCTURE runs for African populations for K = 2 - 15. (a) results for all runs 
(b) results after removing outliers and rescaling the Y axis. 
We
ste
rn B
ant
u A
AC
Central S
udanic A
AC
Eastern Bantu AAC
Fulani AAC
Southern African Khoesan/Mbuti AAC
Cushitic AAC
W. Pygmy AAC
Sandawe AAC
Niger-Kordofanian AAC
Hadza AAC
Mbugu AAC
Saharan/Dogon AAC
Nilo-Saharan AAC
Chadic-Saharan AAC
Figure S16: Un-rooted neighbor-joining tree from pairwise net nucleotide genetic distances calculated from the inferred 
ancestral allele frequencies at K = 14 from STRUCTURE analysis of the African dataset. Major clades observed in the tree 
include the North African/Dogon, Fulani, Cushitic, and Mbugu AACs, the SAK-Mbuti Pygmy and W. Pygmy AACs, and the 
Hadza and Sandawe AACs. The Nilo-Saharan and Chadic-Saharan AAC form a sister group and cluster with the Central 
Sudanic AAC. The Bantu AACs radiate from the center of the tree 
Ha
dz
a
Sa
nd
aw
e
Ira
qw
Bu
ru
ng
e
Fi
om
e
M
bu
gu
M
aa
sa
i
Ak
ie
Da
to
g
Tu
ru
Su
ku
m
a
Go
go
M
bu
gw
e
Ra
ng
i
Sa
m
ba
a
Pa
re
Ga
br
a
Bo
ra
na
W
at
a
Re
nd
ill
e
El
_M
ol
o
Ya
ak
u
M
aa
sa
i_
M
um
on
yo
t
M
aa
sa
i_
Il’g
w
es
i
Do
ro
bo
Tu
ge
n
Sa
m
bu
ru
M
ar
ak
w
et
Se
ng
w
er
Ok
ie
k
Na
nd
i
Sa
ba
ot
Tu
rk
an
a
Po
ko
t
M
aa
sa
i Il
ch
am
us Lu
o
Ba
nt
u_
Ke
ny
a
Ki
ku
yu
Lu
hy
a
Bu
rji
Ko
ns
o
Be
ta
_I
sr
ae
l
Di
nk
a
Nu
er
Sh
ill
uk
Ny
im
an
g
2
3
4
5
6
25
25
25
23
7
16
15
8 12
9 11
1010
Ta
nz
an
ia
Ke
ny
a
Et
hi
op
ia
KS AA NS NK AA NS NK AA
Eastern Africa
Su
da
n
NSK FNSAA
Figure S17: Results of STRUCTURE analysis for Eastern Africa at K = 2 -10. Values for K are shown on the left and the 
number of similar runs (F) for the primary mode for each set of 25 STRUCTURE runs at each K value is shown on the 
right. 
-3 ,200,000
-3,150,000
-3,100,000
-3,050,000
-3,000,000
-2,950,000
-2,900,000
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Eastern Africa
Figure S18: Likelihood scores for 25 STRUCTURE runs for Eastern African populations for K = 2 - 15. 
Okiek
Nilo-Saharan
Akie
El Molo
S. Cushitic
E. Cushitic
Hadza
Niger-Kordofanian
Sandawe
Mbugu
Figure S19: Un-rooted neighbor-joining tree from pairwise net nucleotide genetic distances calculated from the inferred 
ancestral allele frequencies for clusters at K = 10 with STRUCTURE analysis of the Eastern African dataset 
Ba
nu
am
ir
Be
ja
Ha
da
nd
aw
a B
ej
a
M
oz
ab
ite
2
3
25
17
K
Saharan Africa
F
Figure S20: Results of STRUCTURE analysis for Saharan Africa at K = 2 -3. Values for K are shown on the left 
and the number of similar runs (F) for the primary mode for each set of 25 STRUCTURE runs at each K value is 
shown on the right. 
-193 ,000
-192 ,500
-192 ,000
-191 ,500
-191 ,000
-190 ,500
-190 ,000
-189 ,500
-189 ,000
-188 ,500
1 2 3 4 5 6
Saharan Africa
Figure S21: Likelihood scores for 25 STRUCTURE runs for Saharan African populations for K = 2 - 5. 
Figure S22: Results of STRUCTURE analysis for Central Africa at K = 2 -9. Note that the southern Sudanese are 
included in these analyses because of shared ancestral clusters as inferred on the basis of analyses of the global and 
African datasets. Values for K are shown on the left and the number of similar runs (F) for the primary mode for 
each set of 25 STRUCTURE runs at each K value is shown on the right. 
-4 ,600,000
-4,400,000
-4,200,000
-4,000,000
-3,800,000
-3,600,000
-3,400,000
-3,200,000
-3,000,000
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
Central Africa
Figure S23: Likelihood scores for 25 STRUCTURE runs for Central African populations for K = 2 - 10. 
 
AA
NKNK
NK NK
Ni
ge
ria
Gh
an
a
Se
ne
ga
l
M
ali
I.C
.
Ca
m
er
oo
n
AA NK NS
Western Africa
M
an
di
nk
a
Do
go
n
Di
ou
la
As
ha
nt
i
Br
on
g
Ha
us
a
Fu
la
ni
Yo
ru
ba
Yo
ru
ba
 (C
EP
H)
Ig
al
a
Ig
bo
Gw
ar
i
Ba
ss
an
ge
Ko
m
a
M
ad
a
Ou
ld
em
e
Gi
zig
a
M
an
da
ra
Ko
to
ko
Zu
lg
o
Po
do
kw
o
M
as
sa
Ha
us
a
Ba
gg
ar
a
Ad
am
aw
a 
Fu
la
ni
M
bo
ro
ro
 F
ul
an
i
Tu
pu
ri
Ba
ka
Ba
ko
la
Be
dz
an
M
va
e
Ng
um
ba
Zi
m
e
Ba
m
ou
n
Ba
ne
n
Le
m
an
de
Ba
ta
ng
a
Iy
as
sa
Fa
ng
M
ab
ea
Ya
m
ba
ss
a
So
ut
h 
Ti
ka
r
No
rth
 T
ik
ar
Nt
um
u
Bu
lu
Et
on
W
im
bu
m
Ba
tie
Ew
on
do
Ka
nu
ri
2
3
4
5
6
25
25
25
19
19
7 18
K FNK
Figure S24: Results of STRUCTURE analysis for Western Africa at K = 2 -7. Note that the southern Cameroon 
populations are included because of shared ancestral clusters as inferred the basis of analyses of the global and 
African datasets and to distinguish subtle substructure between Bantu and non-Bantu Niger-Kordofanian speakers. 
Values for K are shown on the left and the number of similar runs (F) for the primary mode for each set of 25 
STRUCTURE runs at each K value is shown on the right. 
-4 ,500,000
-4,300,000
-4,100,000
-3,900,000
-3,700,000
-3,500,000
-3,300,000
-3,100,000
-2,900,000
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
Western Africa
Figure S25: Likelihood scores for 25 STRUCTURE runs for Western African populations for K = 2 - 10. 
 
2
3
Ca
pe
 M
ix
ed
 A
nc
es
try
 
Sa
n
!X
un
/K
ho
e
Xh
os
a
Ve
nd
a
So
ut
h 
Ba
nt
u
25
25
Southern Africa
K F
Figure S26: Results of STRUCTURE analysis for Southern Africa at K = 2 -3. Values for K are shown on the left 
and the number of similar runs (F) for the primary mode for each set of 25 STRUCTURE runs at each K value is 
shown on the right. 
-282000
-280000
-278000
-276000
-274000
-272000
-270000
1 2 3 4 5 6
Southern Africa
Figure S27: Likelihood scores for 25 STRUCTURE runs for Southern African populations for K = 2 - 5. 
- 2
2.
5
-1
5.
0
-7
.5 0.
0
7.
5
15
.0
22
.5
30
.0
37
.5
45
.0
52
.5
60
.0
67
.5
75
.0
82
.5
90
.0
97
.5
10
5.
0
11
2.
5
12
0.
0
12
7.
5
13
5.
0
14
2.
5
15
0.
0
15
7.
5
16
5.
0
17
2.
5
18
0.
0
18
7.
5
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
-40
0.9-1
0.8-0.9
0.7-0.8
0.6-0.7
0.5-0.6
0.4-0.5
0.3-0.4
0.2-0.3
0.1-0.2
0-0.1
-0.1-0
-0.2--0 .1
-0.3--0 .2
-0.4--0 .3
-0.5--0 .4
-0.6--0 .5
-0.7--0 .6
-0.8--0 .7
-0.9--0 .8
-1--0 .9
-1.1--1
r
Figure S28: The geographic origin of modern humans and the route of migration out of Africa estimated 
under a serial founder effect model (S25) .  This inference was based on the geographic position of sampled 
populations and the correlation between estimated levels of genetic diversity for each population and 
estimated distance from the origin (r). The red circle indicates the inferred origin of migration within Africa 
and white circle indicates the inferred waypoint out of Africa  
-2
2 .
5
-1
2.
5
-2
.5 7.
5
1 7
.5
27
.5
37
.5
47
.5
57
.5
6 7
.5
77
.5
87
.5
97
.5
10
7.
5
11
7.
5
12
7.
5
13
7.
5
14
7.
5
15
7.
5
16
7.
5
17
7.
5
18
7.
5
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
-40
0.04-0.05
0.03-0.04
0.02-0.03
0.01-0.02
0-0.01
0
frequency
Longitude
La
ti
tu
d
e
-2
2.
5
-1
0
2.
5 15
27
.5 40
52
.5 65
77
.5 90
10
2.
5
11
5
12
7.
5
14
0
15
2.
5
16
5
17
7.
5
70
57.5
45
32.5
20
7.5
-5
-17.5
-30
0.15-0.2
0.1-0.15
0.05-0.1
0-0.05
0
frequency
Longitude
La
ti
tu
d
e
Figure S29: Results of Bootstrap analyses used to infer origin and waypoint of migration of modern 
humans within and out of Africa. For each grid point the frequency of replicates that fall upon that point is 
indicated. A) Bootstrap results for origin analysis; B) Bootstrap results for waypoint analysis. 
 
A
B
 DEEP BRANCHING OF KHOISAN, UNDIFFERENTIATED
(median cognation; projected dates)
Proto-Khoisan
— 2-3%
   (12,000 BP?)
Proto-Southern African Khoisan
S.Kenya Rift-Highlands — 6%
Khoisan    Khoisan      (9500 BP)
[source of
loanwords in
Rift SCush]
Tana River E.Uganda N.Kenya
  Khoisan Khoisan Khoisan
[source of [source of [source of
loanwords loanwords loanwords East-Turkana    proto-Taa
in Dahalo]   in Rub] in PSCush]    Khoisan   (‘Southern’)
 [source of
loanwords in     proto-Khoe-Kwadi
 PMaa-Rift
   S.Cush] Proto-Khoe (‘Central’)
— 48%
proto-Kalahari Khoe      (2400 BP?)
Zhu group    Khoekhoe 
           (‘Northern’) West       East
Khoe      Khoe
Sandawe Hadza !Kun       Nama-Damara      Kwadi — present day
2    1     174
              proto-Niger-Kordofanian    (median cognation)
NIGER-KORDOFANIAN STRATIGRAPHY
       — 2%
  proto-Niger-Congo
  proto-Atlantic-Congo        — 4%
   proto-Kadu-  proto-Atlantic       proto-Ijo-Congo        — 5%
  Kordofanian
proto-South        — 7%
   Atlantic proto-Volta-Congo
       — 8%
 proto-North Volta-Congo proto-South Volta-Congo (Benue-Kwa)
proto-Adamawa-Ubangian      proto-Benue-Congo     — 11%
           
      proto-E.Benue-Congo
         proto-Adamawa  proto-Ubangian proto-Kwa proto-W.Benue-Congo
                — 15%
  
         proto-East Ubangian          — 21%
 proto-
Cangin          — 29%
proto-North      proto-  proto-Volta-
  proto-Mande         Senegambian       Gur        Comoe
            proto-      — 39%
      Igala-
     Mumuye         Yoruboid
 proto-         group    proto-West  proto-   proto-      — 53%
 proto- Dogon     Ubangian   Nupoid  Edoid
Kordofan     proto-Mbum      proto-Akan      — 63%
    proto-   proto-
     proto-Kadu   proto-    Yoruba    Igbo    — 73%
proto-Manding      proto-     Ijo    proto-
    Fulani     Gbe      — 86%
       17 Mbum
Malinke  Diula  Temne  Jola  Wolof   153   Serer       (Wimbum)   Laka  Koma  Day Baka  Gbaya  Yakoma Zande Asante  Brong    Igala Gwari
   58 162       181        148, 154 143     176    12     152 150       106 107      59      89     88      86
          (Niger-Kordofanian tree precedes here) EASTERN BENUE-CONGO STRATIGRAPHY        (median cognation)
  proto-Benue-Congo   — 11%
          proto-Western       proto-Eastern Benue-Congo
          Benue-Congo   — 13%
            proto-Bantoid-Cross
proto-Bantoid
proto-Platoid
proto-Southern Bantoid
    proto-Jarawan-Bantoid
proto-Bantu-Grasslands
             proto-Cross-River   — 15%
      proto-Bantu
  — 18%
   proto-Nyong-
      proto-Eastern Grasslands       Lomami
  — 26%
    proto-Dako-            (Bantu Trees A-D
   Mambilooid follow from here)
  proto-
Jarawan
proto-   — 63%
    proto-Tivoid    proto-Ekoid         Coastlands
  proto-Tikar
  — 86%
So.Tikar   No.Tikar   Bedzan      Bati
    100         101  14      155
        (East Benue-Congo tree precedes here) A:  DEEP-LEVEL BANTU TREE OF RELATIONSHIPS     (median cognation)
proto-Bantu
— 18%
  proto-Nyong-Lomami
— 26%
proto-Sangha-Kwa
— 29%
  proto-Tanga-Bomwali    proto-Forest-Savanna-Bantu
— 31%
         proto-
        proto-  Savanna-
        Nzadi    Bantu
    proto-Buneya
— 39%
— 46%
        proto-
        Boan
         proto-Benga-Duala proto-Fang-Bafia
— 49%
    proto-Eton-Fang
      — 53%
proto-
Langa-
         proto-Benga-Yasa     proto-Kota- Mbesa      proto-    proto-
       Wumvu    Lebonya  Teke-
 proto- proto-       proto-          proto-           proto-       proto-        Mbede
 Coastlands       proto-Mavea        Fang-Bulu  Ewondo-Eton         Okani          Mboshi               Enya-Binja — 73%
     Mvae    Ngumba          Duala — 86%
Mbo  Bakola    Mabea      Yasa Batanga  Fang Ntumu Bulu  Eton Ewondo  Bafia Lemande Banen Yambasa   Babole    Ingundi Kele     Mbuti
  13  15   98    16     96      31         97     102     105    167    166    29   30      28      99        42
B:  SECOND-LEVEL BANTU TREE OF RELATIONSHIPS:  NZADI GROUP
       (median cognation; projected date)
proto-Forest-Savanna-Bantu
  — 31%
proto-Mboshi proto-Langa- proto-Boan   proto-Enya- proto-Lebonya   proto-Teke-Mbede proto-Savanna
     proto-Nzadi
     —33%
           (3500 BP)
        proto-Babenzele-Bobangi  proto-Kongo-Nzebi
         proto-Mongo-Tetela
proto-Mikaya-Bambomba
      proto-Mokiba
Bobangi     proto-      proto-
      proto-       proto-    Igama-  proto- Songo-
 Bambomba-    Bushong-      Vili  Boma- Yanzi
     Zamba        Cwa  Tiene
    proto-
  Ngando-  proto-        Proto-Kongo-
  Mokiba Mongo Yaka
  proto-Pama-
    Bobangi
proto-
          Babenzele-        proto-
          Bambenga        Nzebi-
 Buja-          Likau-   Zamba-       Ibeembe
Ngombe         Likoka  Libiinza proto-Tetela   proto-Punu Mbagani-
 Gyano-   Bambomba  Lwalwa
Bakolu            Bamba-   Mwe  Kula-            Mikaya      Baluma  Inyele      group    proto-Ombo-
Pande Mbati Mweku Biaka    Bambengangale  Bongili      Ngengele Kongo
    41   157
C:  SECOND-LEVEL BANTU TREE OF RELATIONSHIPS:  SAVANNA-BANTU
 (median cognation)
    proto-Forest-Savanna-Bantu
—31%
  proto-Mboshi   proto-Langa-   proto-Boan     proto-       proto-Lebonya       proto- proto-Nzadi
      Mbesa Enya-Binja   Teke-Mbede proto-Savanna-Bantu
—33%
      proto-Eastern-Savanna Bantu
—36%
    proto-Mashariki        proto-Njila —39%
   (Western Savannah)
  (Mashariki Tree D    proto-Luba-Songye
       follows here)    proto- —49%
            Kavango-
       proto-Luba-Kete SW-Bantu
—58%
 proto-Lwena
     proto-Sabi proto-Botatwe proto-
Luba
—68%
 proto-Pende
 proto-Lega
   Luba-     Luba-
   Kasai    Katanga
     159  or  159
    (which Luba?)    ‘Barega”      Kimbundu       Rund
          Luyana    Nkoya   Kaonde  Kanyok      Kete  Songye  Hemba    158    Mbukushu    Ovimbundu
D:  THIRD-LEVEL BANTU TREE OF RELATIONSHIPS:  MASHARIKI
         (median cognation; projected dates)
proto-Mashariki
— 39%
    (3000 BP)
   proto-Kusi proto-Kaskazi
— 42%
  proto-Western       proto-Rungwe     proto-Great Lakes
     Mashariki — 46%
   (2500 BP?)
         proto-Rufiji- — 49%
Ruvumua
 proto-NE-Coastal proto-Takama            proto-
         Western — 53%
           Lakes    (1700 BP?)
      proto-Nyasa         proto-Southeast Bantu       proto-Wami
proto-Luhya — 58%
  proto-East  proto-    (1700 BP?)
        proto- proto-    Nyanza  North
   proto-Njombe     Sabaki  Ruvu Nyanza — 63%
proto-    proto-Langi-
Shona                Mbugwe   
    proto-Makua — 68%
       (1200 BP?)
      proto-Nguni
  proto- — 73%
  Seuta
     proto-Thagicu
— 79%
— 86%
   (which?) Kinyarwanda
        Venda Xhosa  Pare  Gogo  Shambaa  Turu  Sukuma  Langi  Mbugwe Kikuyu     Luhya       Rugungu  Ganda  (Tutsi/Hutu)
          173   175   10   94    119     4      93       6        5     129        127      149
      proto-Nilo-Saharan NILO-SAHARAN STRATIGRAPHY (median cognation; projected dates)
  — 1-2%
(13,000-15,000 BP?)
   proto-Sudanic
    — 1-3%
 proto-Northern Sudanic   — 10,500 BP
 (dated by archaeological
   proto-Saharo-Sahelian correlations)     — 9500 BP
(cognation ranges with     — 9000 BP
    proto-Sahelian overlapping medians 3-6%)
   proto-Koman     — 8500 BP
        proto-Trans-Sahel
       proto-Western Sahelian       proto-Eastern Sahelian
 proto-Saharan
   proto-Kir-Abbaian
       proto-Central Sudanic
proto-   proto-Kir
    proto-West          proto-Astaboran Jebel
 Central Sudanic      Nuba Mts.  proto-Surma-Nilotic
          — 10%
proto-East      proto-         proto-Western     proto-Surmic         proto-Nilotic     (7000 BP?)
       Central Sudanic  Kresh-Aja Proto-          Astaboran      — 15%
         Bodolean         proto-Western      (6000 BP?)
    proto-Maban   Nilotic          proto-Eastern
   Nilotic     — 27%
    proto-      (4000 BP?)
   Bongo-             proto-Rub        proto-Southern
              Bagirmi  proto-Nubian   Nilotic      —3000 BP
          proto- (39%)
            Daju      —2500 BP
(46%)
                     —1000 BP
Gumuz     Baledha       Bulala            Kresh   Zaghawa          Aiki    Maba   Tama          Murle     Nuer    Teso Bari (73%)
           Uduk  Lugbara   146 Kaba     Aja Kunama             Kanuri  For  Songay  Masalit        Nobiin   Midob  Ik  Soo   Gaam          Didinga    Dinka    Pok    Pakot        Lotuxo       —present
      Mangbetu 144 Sara,  Bongo     Teda  Kanembu  Nara     Dongolawi         Bertha      Majangir       Luo    Burun   Tugen  Datoga      Maasai
  Ngambay 171, 144   18, 147 (80%)
NILOTIC STRATIGAPHIES      (median cognation and projected dates)
  proto-Nilotic (PN)
— 15%
            (6000 BP?)
proto-Western Nilotic — 21%
 (5000 BP?)
  
               
proto-Eastern Nilotic
  
 — 29%
   (4000 BP?)
  
  proto-Jii-Luo
  proto-Burun
proto-Tung’a
 — 39%
(3000 BP?)
proto-Southern Nilotic   
— 46%
(2500 BP?)
           proto-Lotuko-Maa proto-Jii
    
proto-Tato — 53%
(2000 BP?)
proto-Kalenjin
proto-Maa-Ongamo proto-Bari proto-Jyang
 
                     proto-Ateker
   — 73%
 proto-No.Kalenjin proto-Luo (1000 BP?)
proto-Central proto-Elgon           proto-Maa
Kalenjin Kalenjin  proto-Southern Luo
           — 86%
Maasai (500 BP?)
139
Omotik Okiek Nandi Kipsigis Pok Pakot Sampur Lotuko   Teso Karimojong Bari Atuot Mabaan,
Datoga Akie 131 133 Tuken Sapiny Marakwet   Camus 116 Ongamo  Dongotong Lopit Turkana Mondari Kakwa Luo  Acoli Lango Alur Jur Anywa Shilluk  Nuer Dinka Burun Jumjum
92 9 124 136 126, 130 114 115 8 141 138  128 169 168 91
      proto-Afroasiatic CHADIC STRATIGRAPHY          (median cognation; projected dates)
        — 1%
            (15,000+ BP?)
proto-Erythraic
        — 1-2%
       14,000 BP?)
                     proto-Boreafrasan
        — 3%
          (12,500 BP)
  proto-Cushitic       proto-Chado-Berber         — 5-6%
                  (10,000 BP)
       proto-Agaw-East-South Cushitic  
        — 7-8%
  proto-East-South (8500 BP?)
    Cushitic         proto-Chadic
        — 9-10%
     (7500 BP?)
 proto-Omotic       proto-Eastern
        Cushitic         — 10-12%
(7000 BP?)
       
 proto-      proto-Southern        proto-
 North                    Cushitic          proto-West               Semitic  — 18%
Omotic        proto-East Chadic    Chadic        ancient (5500 BP)
                    Egyptian         — 24%
       proto-Central  (4500 BP?)
Chadic         proto-
          (Northern        Berber         — 29%
       proto-Agaw       East Chadic)    proto-Southern    (4000 BP?)
proto-         East Chadic
            South    proto-Masa proto-Mandara Mts.         — 55%
           Omotic         (2000 BP?)
               — 63%
                proto-Beja                proto-Hausa         (1500 BP?)
                    — 73%
        Coptic (1000 BP?)
Tupuri    Masa     Zime     Kotoko    Mandara Uldeme  Podokwo Mada   Gisiga   Zulgo  Hausa  Hausa   Mzab       Baggara     —present
   104    103       20           25     23        21        32           19        22 26       156 89 75 24
proto-Afroasiatic CUSHITIC STRATIGRAPHY           (median cognation; projected dates)
        — 1%
(15,000+ BP?)
 proto-Erythraic
        — 1-2%
       (14,000 BP?)
                         proto-Boreafrasan
        — 2-3%
          (12,500 BP)
proto-Cushitic       proto-Chado-Berber
             — 5-6%
   (10,000 BP)
      proto-Agaw-East-South Cushitic
          — 7-8%
proto-East-South Cushitic   (8500 BP?)
 proto-Chadic         — 9-10%
     (7500 BP?)
 proto-Omotic   proto-Eastern Cushitic
        — 10-12%
        proto-Yaaku (7000 BP?)
 Dullay                proto-Southern Cushitic                                proto-
 proto-    proto-Lowland E. Cushitic       Semitic  — 18%
 North                        (5500 BP)
Omotic proto-South Lowland E. Cushitic proto-Rift-Ma’a        ancient
                 Egyptian         — 23%
           proto- (3000 BP?)
proto-Omo-Tana      proto-Rift       Berber
            proto-          — 36%
          proto- proto- Highland         proto-East O-T         (3300 BP?)
  South Omotic            Agaw            E. Cushitic      proto- proto-West O-T          proto-East
Konsoromo proto- Rift         — 50%
         proto-Beja            Bayso- (2200 BP)
      proto-            Jiiddu         proto-West Rift         — 69%
               Dullay             proto-Oromo   (1200 BP)
      Beta Israel   Afar Dasanech   Soomaali        Coptic         — 85%
   Amer   Hadendowa  177 Yaaku   Burji    Saho  Konso    Borana Gabra  Waata   Molo     Rendille   Dahalo  Ma’a  Burunge    Iraqw    Gorowa (500 BP)
    90         123  117    125   142      140       135      132    134         137      11        17 3 95
Figure S30: Linguistic relationships among populations and trees of language divergence constructed 
with several sources of linguistic, archeological, and ethnographic data (S45, S46). Divergence times 
between related languages were estimated with archeological dates and glottochronological methods (S49). 
Percent similarity is from the number of shared cognates between languages. Linguistic phylogenies for  
(a) the Khoesan language family  
(b) Niger-Kordofanian language family  
(c) Eastern Bantu-congo languages  
(d) Deep-level Bantu relationships  
(e) Second-level Bantu relationships  
(f) Second-level Bantu relationships for Savanna-bantu  
(g) Third-level bantu relationships for Mashariki Bantu languages  
 (h) Nilo-Saharan languages  
(i) Nilotic languages  
(j) Chadic languages  
(k) Cushitic languages 
Plot of NK with and without Pygmies
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
Language Distance (1-Similarity)
NKP
NKδ
μ2
Figure S31 
A
Plot of NS group
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
Language Distance (1-Language Similarity)
NSδ
μ2
Figure S31
B
Plot of AA group
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
Language Distance (1-Language Similarity)
AA
δμ
2
C
Figure S31: Plot of genetic distance (δμ)2 vs. linguistic distance on the basis of number of shared cognates between pairs of 
populations within language families. A)  NK includes populations speaking a Niger-Kordofanian language, excluding the 
Pygmies. NKP includes only the pygmies compared to the NK speaking populations and to each other. B) NS includes Nilo-
Saharan speaking populations and C) AA includes Afroasiatic speaking populations. The analyses presented in Table S5 for NK 
with Pygmies includes the NK and NKP comparisons shown in this figure. 
Pima
Han
French
Dinka
Lemande
San
Mbororo Fulani
Mada
Mandinka
Baka
Hadza Iraqw
Indian
Oceanic
Ira
qw Ba
ka
M
ad
a
Ha
dz
a
Sa
n
Di
nk
a
M
an
di
nk
a
Le
m
an
de
In
di
an
Fr
en
ch
Ha
n 
Ch
in
es
e
Pi
m
a
Pa
pu
a 
Ne
w
 G
ui
na
Ch
ica
go
Pi
tts
bu
rg
h
Ba
lti
m
or
e
No
rth
 C
ar
ol
in
a
CM
A
Af
ric
an
 A
m
er
ica
n
CM
A
Fu
la
ni
 M
bo
ro
ro
A
B
Figure S32: Analyses of Cape Mixed Ancestry (CMA) and African American populations. A) The global distribution of 
training populations used in supervised STRUCTURE analysis to infer CMA and African American ancestry; B) Inferred 
ancestry in African American and CMA populations using supervised STRUCTURE analysis.  Results for individuals from 
African American sub-populations and the CMA population are shown on the left, and ancestry by proportion of the Mandinka 
AAC in the pooled African American population and in the CMA population are shown on the right.   
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
non-GATA average variation
G
AT
A
av
er
ag
e
va
r ia
tio
n Non-European
European
Figure S33: Plot of GATA vs non-GATA microsatellite marker variation. These data indicate a significant 
difference in deviation between European and non-European samples in the ratio of GATA to non-GATA 
population variances as described in methods. 
 22
 
Supplementary Tables 
Table S1: Populations used in the current study. Also given are approximate geographic 
coordinates for location of populations and classification on the basis of language and 
traditional subsistence method. 
 
Table S2: Allele size adjustments made for integrating new African datasets with 
previously genotyped data from the CEPH diversity panel, India, and Australia. 
 
Table S3: Analysis of Molecular Variance (AMOVA) with 848 microsatellites in the 
global population and among African populations classified by geographic origin, 
languages spoken, and subsistence. 
 
Table S4. Genetic by geographic distance analyses a) Spearman’s Rho correlation 
between genetic and geographic distance by region and within Africa b) heterogeneity of 
Spearman’s Rho across regions 
 
Table S5: Regressions of genetic distance on linguistic distance, subdivided by major 
language families and into sub families, and of genetic distance on geographic distance 
 
Table S6: Proportion of AACs for the African American and Cape Mixed Ancestry 
populations with unsupervised STRUCTURE analysis with the global dataset. 
 
Table S7: Proportion of AACs for the African American and Cape Mixed Ancestry 
populations with a supervised STRUCTURE analysis. Populations with high frequencies 
of AACs were used as training populations for this analysis.  Because none of the African 
populations show 100% ancestry from a single AAC, these should not be considered as 
population admixture estimates.   
 
Table S8: Proportion of AACs in each populations from global STRUCTURE analyses 
at K=14. Cells that are the maximum for each column and represent the highest 
proportion for each AAC are highlighted. 
 
Table S9: Proportion of AACs in each populations from Africa STRUCTURE analyses 
at K=14. Cells that are the maximum for each column and represent the highest 
proportion for each AAC are highlighted. 
 
 23
Supplemental references 
 
S1. S. A. Miller, D. D. Dykes, H. F. Polesky, Nucleic Acids Res 16, 1215 (Feb 11, 
1988). 
S2. http://www.tau.ac.il/medicine/NLGIP/catalog.htm. 
S3.
 http://research.marshfieldclinic.org/genetics/GenotypingData_Statistics/hu
manDiversityPanel.asp. 
S4. N. A. Rosenberg et al., PLoS Genet 1, e70 (Dec, 2005). 
S5. N. A. Rosenberg et al., Science 298, 2381 (Dec 20, 2002). 
S6. N. A. Rosenberg et al., PLoS Genet 2, e215 (Dec, 2006). 
S7. M. P. Epstein, W. L. Duren, M. Boehnke, Am J Hum Genet 67, 1219 (Nov, 2000). 
S8. N. A. Rosenberg, Ann Hum Genet 70, 841 (Nov, 2006). 
S9. N. Patterson, A. L. Price, D. Reich, PLoS Genet 2, e190 (Dec, 2006). 
S10. http://www.graphviz.org. 
S11. D. B. Goldstein, A. Ruiz Linares, L. L. Cavalli-Sforza, M. W. Feldman, Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A 92, 6723 (Jul 18, 1995). 
S12. http://evolution.genetics.washington.edu/phylip.html. 
S13. L. L. Cavalli-Sforza, A. Piazza, P. Menozzi, J. Mountain, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 
A 85, 6002 (Aug, 1988). 
S14. M. Nei, A. K. Roychoudhury, Mol Biol Evol 10, 927 (Sep, 1993). 
S15. A. M. Bowcock et al., Nature 368, 455 (Mar 31, 1994). 
S16. M. Nei, N. Takezaki, Mol Biol Evol 13, 170 (Jan, 1996). 
S17. A. M. Valdes, M. Slatkin, N. B. Freimer, Genetics 133, 737 (1993). 
S18. P. O. Lewis, D. V. Zaykin. (2001). 
S19. M. Nei, Molecular Evolutionary Genetics.  (Columbia University Press, New 
York, 1987). 
S20. M. Kimura, T. Ohta, Genetics 75, 199 (1973). 
S21. Z. A. Szpiech, M. Jakobsson, N. A. Rosenberg, Bioinformatics 24, 2498 (Nov 1, 
2008). 
S22. B. S. Wier, Genetic data analysis II: Methods for discrete population genetic 
data.,  (Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, MA, ed. 2nd 1996). 
S23. http://www.ethnologue.com. 
S24. H. M. Cann et al., Science 296, 261 (Apr 12, 2002). 
S25. S. Ramachandran et al., Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102, 15942 (Nov 1, 2005). 
S26. O. Francois, S. Ancelet, G. Guillot, Genetics 174, 805 (Oct, 2006). 
S27. http://genepath.med.harvard.edu/~reich/Software.htm. 
S28. http://pritch.bsd.uchicago.edu/structure.html. 
S29. J. K. Pritchard, M. Stephens, P. Donnelly, Genetics 155, 945 (Jun, 2000). 
S30. J. S. Friedlaender et al., PLoS Genet 4, e19 (Jan, 2008). 
S31. D. Falush, M. Stephens, J. K. Pritchard, Genetics 164, 1567 (Aug, 2003). 
S32. M. Jakobsson, N. A. Rosenberg, Bioinformatics 23, 1801 (Jul 15, 2007). 
S33. http://rosenberglab.bioinformatics.med.umich.edu/distruct.html. 
S34. N. A. Rosenberg, Molecular Ecology Notes 4, 134 (2004). 
S35. S. S. Shapiro, M. B. Wilk, Biometrika 52, 591 (1965). 
 24
S36. R. R. Sokal, F. J. Rohlf, Introduction to Biostatistics.  (Freeman and Company, 
San Francisco, ed. 2nd, 1987), pp. xii, 363  
S37. SAS. (SAS Institute Inc, Cary, NC, 2004). 
S38. C. Ehret, A Comparative Historical Reconstruction of Proto-Nilo-Saharan. . 
Sprache und Geschichte in Afrika. SUGIA-Supplements (Rüdiger Köppe Verlag, 
Cologne, 2001), vol. 12, pp. 633. 
S39. C. Ehret, Reconstructing Proto-Afroasiatic (Proto-Afrasian) : vowels, tone, 
consonants, and vocabulary. University of California publications in linguistics v. 
126 (University of California Press, Berkeley, 1995), pp. xvii, 557. 
S40. P. Newman, Journal of African Languages. 5, 5 (1977). 
S41. M. L. Bender, Anthropological Linguistics 13, 165 (1971). 
S42. C. Ehret, Sprache und Geschichte in Afrika 8, 7 (1987). 
S43. C. Ehret, in In Hot Pursuit of Language in Prehistory, J. Bengtson, Ed. (John 
Benjamins, Amsterdam, 2008),  pp. 140-160. 
S44. C. Ehret, Studies in African Linguistics 22, 211 (1991). 
S45. C. Ehret, The historical reconstruction of Southern Cushitic phonology and 
vocabulary. Kölner Beiträge zur Afrikanistik 5. Bd. (Reimer, Berlin, 1980), pp. 
407. 
S46. K. Williamson, R. Blench, in African Languages: an introduction, B. Heine, D. 
Nurse, Eds. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000),  pp. 11-42. 
S47. http://www.history.ucla.edu/ehret/. 
S48. Y. Bastin, A. Coupez, M. Mann, Continuity and divergence in the Bantu 
languages : perspectives from a lexicostatistic study. Annalen. 
Menswetenschappen = Annales. Sciences humaines (Musée royal de l'Afrique 
centrale, Tervuren, Belgium, 1999), pp. vi, 225. 
S49. W. A. A. Wilson, in in The Niger-Congo Languages, J. Bendor-Samuel, Ed. 
(University Press of America, Lanham, MD, 1989),  pp. 81-104. 
S50. T. Naden, in in Niger-Congo Languages J. Bendor-Samuel, Ed. (University Press 
of America, Lanham, MD, 1989),  pp. 140-168. 
S51. K. A. Klieman, "The Pygmies were our compass" : Bantu and Batwa in the 
history of west central Africa, early times to c. 1900 C.E. Social history of Africa 
(Heinemann, Portsmouth, NH, 2003), pp. xxxiv, 253. 
S52. D. E. Saxon, in in The Archaeological and Linguistic Reconstruction of African 
History, C. Ehret, M. Posnansky, Eds. (University of California, Berkeley, 1982),  
pp. 39-56. 
S53. R. G. Armstrong, The Study of West African Languages (Ibadan University Press, 
Ibadan, 1964), pp. 74. 
S54. L. E. Wilson, Ph.D. diss, University of California (1980). 
S55. R. Vossen, The Eastern Nilotic Languages (Dietrich Reimer Verlag, Berlin, 
1982), pp. 512. 
S56. R. Thelwall, in in The Archaeological and Linguistic Reconstruction of African 
History, C. Ehret, M. Posnansky, Eds. (University of California, Berkeley, 1982),  
pp. 39-56. 
S57. C. Ehret, in Culture History in the Southern Sudan, J. Mack, P. Robertshaw, Eds. 
(British Institute in Eastern Africa, Nairobi, 1983),  pp. 19-48. 
S58. B. Heine, The Kuliak Languages.  ( EAPH, Nairobi, 1976), pp. x, 79. 
 25
S59. J. Distefano, Ph.D. diss., University of California (1985). 
S60. D. E. Saxon, Ph.D diss., University of California (1980). 
S61. R. Thelwall, Ph.D. diss., New University of Ulster (1981). 
S62. C. Ehret, in Archaeology of Early Northeastern Africa, M. Chlodnicki, K. 
Kroeper, Eds. (Poznan Archaeological Museum, Studies in African Archaeology, 
Poznan, Poland, 2006), vol. 9, pp. 1019-1055. 
S63. A. Militarev, in Time Depth in Historical Linguistics, C. Renfrew, A. McMahon, 
L. Trask, Eds. (McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, Cambridge, 
2000), vol. 1, pp. 267-307. 
S64. C. Ehret, Ufahamu 26, 54 (1997). 
S65. C. Ehret, in The Archeological and Linguistic Reconstruction of African History, 
C. Ehret, M. Posnansky, Eds. (University of California Press, Berkeley, 1982),  
pp. 158-181. 
S66. S. M. Embleton, Ed., Statistics in Historical Linguistics,  (Studienverlag 
Brockmeyer, Bochum, Germany, 1986), pp. viii, 194. 
S67. E. T. Wood et al., Eur J Hum Genet 13, 867 (2005). 
S68. J. H. Greenberg, Studies in African Linguistic Classification (Compass Press 
Bradford, CT, 1955). 
S69. C. Ehret, The civilizations of Africa : a history to 1800.  (University Press of 
Virginia, Charlottesville, 2002), pp. xii, 480. 
S70. C. Ehret, S. O. Keita, P. Newman, Science 306, 1680; author reply 1680 (Dec 3, 
2004). 
S71. L. Lim, Ph.D. diss., Brown University (1992). 
S72. T. Güldemann, M. Stoneking, Annu Rev. Anthropol. 37, 93 (2008). 
S73. B. Sands, in Language, identity and conceptualization among the Khoisan, M. 
Schladt, Ed. (Rudiger Kupper Verlag, Koln, 1998), vol. Bd 15, pp. 266 - 283. 
S74. E. D. Elderkin, Sprache und Geschichte in Afrika 4, 67 (1982). 
S75. M. Kimmel et al., Genetics 148, 1921 (Apr, 1998). 
S76. J. P. King, M. Kimmel, R. Chakraborty, Mol Biol Evol 17, 1859 (Dec, 2000). 
S77. M. C. Campbell, S. A. Tishkoff, Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet 9, 403 (2008). 
S78. P. Forster, S. Matsumura, Science 308, 965 (May 13, 2005). 
S79. M. Jakobsson et al., Nature 451, 998 (Feb 21, 2008). 
S80. J. Z. Li et al., Science 319, 1100 (Feb 22, 2008). 
S81. C. Ehret, The International Journal of African Historical Studies 34, 5 (2001). 
S82. J. L. Newman, The Peopling of Africa.  (Yale University Press, New Haven and 
London, 1997), pp. xiv, 235. 
S83. M. Mous, in Mixed languages: 15 case studies in language intertwining, P. 
Bakker, M. Mous, Eds. (IFOTT, Amsterdam, 1994),  pp. 175-201. 
S84. C. Ehret, An African Classical Age : Eastern and Southern Africa in World 
History, 1000 B.C. to A.D. 400.  (University Press of Virginia, Charlottesville, 
1998), pp. xvii, 354. 
S85. C. Ehret, Southern African Humanities 30, 7 (2008). 
S86. C. Ehret, in African Historical Demography, C. Fyfe, D. McMaster, Eds. 
(University of Edinburgh Centre of African Studies, Edinburgh, 1981), vol. 2, pp. 
802. 
 26
S87. C. Ehret, in Early Human Kinship: From Sex to Social Reproduction, N. J. Allen, 
H. Callan, R. Dunbar, W. James, Eds. (Blackwell, Oxford, UK, 2008),  pp. 200-
231,  259-269. 
S88. V. Cerny, A. Salas, M. Hajek, M. Zaloudkova, R. Brdicka, Ann Hum Genet 71, 
433 (Jul, 2007). 
S89. H. Y. Hassan, P. A. Underhill, L. L. Cavalli-Sforza, M. E. Ibrahim, Am J Phys 
Anthropol 137, 316 (Nov, 2008). 
S90. R. E. Bereir et al., Eur J Hum Genet 15, 1183 (Nov, 2007). 
S91. C. Ehret, in West African Linguistics: Studies in Honor of Russell G. Schuh, P. 
Newman, L. Hyman, Eds. (Ohio State University, Columbus, 2006),  pp. 56-66. 
S92. V. Cerny et al., BMC Evol Biol 9, 63 (Mar 23, 2009). 
S93. V. Cerny et al., Hum Biol 78, 9 (Feb, 2006). 
S94. C. A. Mulcare et al., Am J Hum Genet 74, 1102 (Jun, 2004). 
S95. C. Bailey, Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient 28, 20 
(1985). 
S96. Y. Lev, International Journal of Middle East Studies 19, 337 (1987). 
S97. A. Levanoni, Studia Islamica 72, 121 (1990). 
S98. B. J. Walker, Near Eastern Archaeology 62, 202 (1999). 
S99. A. F. C. Holl, T. E. Levy, The Biblical Archaeologist 56, 166 (1993). 
S100. T. E. Levy, A. F. C. Holl, Journal of Anthropological Archaelogy 21, 83 (2002). 
S101. B. Lembezat, Ed., Les populations païennes du Nord- Cameroun et de 
l'Adamaoua,  (Press Universitaires de France, Paris, 1961). 
S102. C. Ehret, Ethiopians and East Africans : the problem of contacts. Nairobi 
Historical Studies (East African Publishing House, Nairobi, 1974), pp. 95. 
S103. S. H. Ambrose, Sprache und Geschichte in Afrika 7.2, 11 (1986). 
S104. S. H. Ambrose, Archaeology and linguistic reconstructions of history in Eastern 
Africa. C. Ehret, M. Posnansy, Eds., The Archaeological and Linguistic 
Reconstruction of African History (University of California Press, Berkeley, 
1982), pp. xii, 299. 
S105. S. Feierman, The Shambaa Kingdom.  (University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, 
1974). 
S106. S. G. Thomason, Contact Languages: A wider perspective. S. G. Thomason, Ed.,  
(John Benjamins Publishing Company, Amsterdam/Philadelphia, 1997), pp. xiii, 
506. 
S107. R. Blackburn, In the land of milk and honey: Okiek adaptations to their forests 
and neighbors. S. Kent, Ed., Cultural diversity among twentieth-century foragers: 
an African perspective (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1996), pp. xiv, 
344. 
S108. L. Cronk, Ethnology 41, 27 (2002). 
S109. L. Cronk, From Mukogodo to Maasai: Ethnicity and Cultural Change in Kenya.  
(Westview Press, Boulder CO, 2004). 
S110. C. Ehret, in in Semino-Hamitic Festschrift for, A. B. Dolgopolsky, G. 
Jungraithmayr, G. Takacs, Eds. (Dietrich Reimer, Berlin, 2008),  pp. xii, 378. 
S111. P. Lieberman, R. McCarthy, Expedition 49, 15 (2007). 
S112. C. Ehret, in in Origins: The Story of the Emergence of Humans and Humanity in 
Africa G. Blundell, Ed. (Double Storey, Cape Town, 2006),  pp. 45,47. 
 27
S113. S. Bahuchet, La rencontre des agriculteurs : les Pygmées parmi les peuples 
d'Afrique centrale. Histoire d'une civilisation forestière (Peeters, Paris, 1993), pp. 
173  
S114. S. Bahuchet, Pygmées de Centrafrique : études ethnologiques, historiques et 
linguistiques sur les Pygmées "Ba. Mbenga" (aka/baka) du nord-ouest du bassin 
congolais. Etudes pygmées 3 (SELAF, Paris, 1979), pp. 179  
S115. H. Terashima, African Study Monographs 28, 7 (2003). 
S116. L. L. Cavalli-Sforza, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94, 7719 (Jul 22, 1997). 
S117. S. Wang et al., PLoS Genet 3, e185 (Nov, 2007). 
S118. K. Hunley et al., PLoS Genet 4, e1000239 (Oct, 2008). 
S119. E. M. Belle, G. Barbujani, Am J Phys Anthropol 133, 1137 (Aug, 2007). 
S120. W. E. Welmers, African language structures.  (University of California Press, 
Berkeley, 1974), pp. xi, 488  
S121. E. J. Parra et al., Am J Hum Genet 63, 1839 (Dec, 1998). 
S122. A. Salas et al., Am J Phys Anthropol 128, 855 (Dec, 2005). 
S123. J. M. Lind et al., Hum Genet 120, 713 (Jan, 2007). 
S124. M. W. Smith et al., Am J Hum Genet 74, 1001 (May, 2004). 
S125. E. J. Parra et al., Am J Phys Anthropol 114, 18 (Jan, 2001). 
S126. http://www.slavevoyages.org/tast/index.faces. 
S127. G. T. Nurse, J. S. Weiner, T. Jenkins, The Peoples of Southern Africa and Their 
Affinities.  (Oxford University Press, New York, 1985), pp. 409. 
S128. J. S. Marais, The Cape Coloured People, 1652-1937 (Witwatersrand University 
Press, Johannesburg, 1968), pp. 296. 
S129. P. Mellars, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103, 9381 (Jun 20, 2006). 
S130. S. McBrearty, A. Brooks, Journal of Human Evolution 39, 453 (2000). 
S131. C. S. Henshilwood et al., Science 295, 1278 (Feb 15, 2002). 
 
 
 
 1
 
Supplementary Tables 
 
Table S1: Populations used in the current study. Also given are approximate geographic 
coordinates for location of populations and classification on the basis of language and 
traditional subsistence method. 
 
Table S2: Allele size adjustments made for integrating new African datasets with 
previously genotyped data from the CEPH diversity panel, India, and Australia. 
 
Table S3: Analysis of Molecular Variance (AMOVA) with 848 microsatellites in the 
global population and among African populations classified by geographic origin, 
languages spoken, and subsistence. 
 
Table S4. Genetic by geographic distance analyses a) Spearman’s Rho correlation 
between genetic and geographic distance by region and within Africa b) heterogeneity of 
Spearman’s Rho across regions 
 
Table S5: Regressions of genetic distance on linguistic distance, subdivided by major 
language families and into sub families, and of genetic distance on geographic distance 
 
Table S6: Proportion of AACs for the African American and Cape Mixed Ancestry 
populations with unsupervised STRUCTURE analysis with the global dataset. 
 
Table S7: Proportion of AACs for the African American and Cape Mixed Ancestry 
populations with a supervised STRUCTURE analysis. Populations with high frequencies 
of AACs were used as training populations for this analysis.  Because none of the African 
populations show 100% ancestry from a single AAC, these should not be considered as 
population admixture estimates.   
 
Table S8: Proportion of AACs in each populations from global STRUCTURE analyses 
at K=14. Cells that are the maximum for each column and represent the highest 
proportion for each AAC are highlighted. 
 
Table S9: Proportion of AACs in each populations from Africa STRUCTURE analyses 
at K=14. Cells that are the maximum for each column and represent the highest 
proportion for each AAC are highlighted. 
 
 
Table S1.  Populations used in the current study
Population Name CEPH n
%Missing 
1327 
markers
Continent Region (UN Statistics Division geoscheme with exceptions) Country Latitude Longitude
Language 
Family
Language Major 
Subgrouping
ISO 639-3 
Language 
Code
Subsistence Notes
Banuamir Beja 23 13 Africa Saharan Africa Sudan 21.0 36.0 Afroasiatic Cushitic BEJ Herder
Hadandawa Beja 19 14 Africa Saharan Africa Sudan 21.0 36.0 Afroasiatic Cushitic BEJ Herder
Mozabite x 29 28 Africa Saharan Africa Algeria 32.0 3.0 Afroasiatic Berber MZB Farmer Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Mandinka x 22 28 Africa Western Africa Senegal 12.0 -12.0 Niger-Kordofanian Mande MNK Farmer Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Dogon 9 43 Africa Western Africa Mali 14.0 -3.0 Niger-Kordofanian Dogon DDS Farmer
Dioula 5 19 Africa Western Africa Ivory Coast 9.5 -4.5 Niger-Kordofanian Mande DYU Farmer
Ashanti 15 14 Africa Western Africa Ghana 6.0 -1.0 Niger-Kordofanian Kwa AKA Farmer
Brong 26 13 Africa Western Africa Ghana 7.5 -2.0 Niger-Kordofanian Kwa ABR Farmer
Hausa 16 13 Africa Western Africa Nigeria 12.0 8.0 Afroasiatic Chadic HAU Farmer
Fulani 4 13 Africa Western Africa Nigeria 11.0 11.0 Niger-Kordofanian Senegambian FUV Herder
Yoruba 25 14 Africa Western Africa Nigeria 8.0 4.0 Niger-Kordofanian Defoid YOR Farmer new sample, not CEPH
Yoruba (CEPH) x 22 28 Africa Western Africa Nigeria 8.0 5.0 Niger-Kordofanian Defoid YOR Farmer Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005, The Y
Igala 17 13 Africa Western Africa Nigeria 7.0 7.0 Niger-Kordofanian Defoid IGL Farmer
Igbo 28 13 Africa Western Africa Nigeria 6.0 7.0 Niger-Kordofanian Igboid IBO Farmer
Gwari 22 15 Africa Western Africa Nigeria 10.0 7.0 Niger-Kordofanian Nupoid GBR Farmer
Bassange 20 13 Africa Western Africa Nigeria 9.0 5.5 Niger-Kordofanian Nupoid NUP Farmer
Koma 12 28 Africa Western Africa Nigeria 8.5 12.7 Niger-Kordofanian Adamawa-Ubangi KMY Mixed Farmer
Mada 28 19 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 10.8 14.1 Afroasiatic Chadic MXU Farmer
Ouldeme 26 17 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 11.0 14.3 Afroasiatic Chadic UDL Farmer
Giziga 24 17 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 10.3 14.3 Afroasiatic Chadic GIZ Farmer
Mandara 26 18 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 11.3 14.0 Afroasiatic Chadic MFI Farmer
Kotoko 17 16 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 11.8 14.8 Afroasiatic Chadic KOT Farmer
Zulgo 22 18 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 10.8 14.0 Afroasiatic Chadic GND Farmer
Podokwo 30 19 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 11.0 12.1 Afroasiatic Chadic PDI Farmer
Massa 15 15 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 10.3 15.3 Afroasiatic Chadic MCN Mixed Farmer (with fishing)
Hausa 27 19 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 10.5 14.5 Afroasiatic Chadic HAU Farmer
Baggara 23 18 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 12.5 14.5 Afroasiatic Semitic SHU Herder
Adamawa Fulani 41 18 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 9.0 13.5 Niger-Kordofanian Senegambian FUB Herder
Mbororo Fulani 13 18 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 11.8 14.8 Niger-Kordofanian Senegambian FUV Herder
Tupuri 22 18 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 10.3 14.8 Niger-Kordofanian Adamawa-Ubangi TUI Farmer
Baka 48 19 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 2.5 13.5 Niger-Kordofanian Adamawa-Ubangi BKC Hunter-Gatherer
Bakola 42 17 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 2.8 10.0 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid GYI Hunter-Gatherer
Bedzan 17 17 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 5.5 11.6 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid TIK Hunter-Gatherer
Mvae 24 18 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 3.0 12.0 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid FAN Farmer
Ngumba 27 21 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 3.0 10.3 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid NMG Farmer
Zime 30 19 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 9.0 14.5 Afroasiatic Chadic ZIM Farmer
Bamoun 31 19 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 5.5 10.8 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid BAX Farmer
Banen 25 18 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 4.8 10.8 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid BAZ Farmer
Bafia 30 19 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 4.8 11.0 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid KSF Farmer
Lemande 26 19 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 4.5 11.0 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid LEM Farmer
Batanga 20 18 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 3.0 10.0 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid BNM Farmer
Iyassa 37 13 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 2.5 9.8 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid YKO Farmer (with fishing)
Fang 19 14 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 2.5 13.0 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid FAN Farmer
Mabea 13 13 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 2.9 10.3 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid NMG Farmer (with fishing)
Yambassa 17 15 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 4.8 11.3 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid YAS Farmer
South Tikar 21 13 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 5.5 11.5 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid TIK Farmer
North Tikar 13 13 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 6.3 11.5 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid TIK Farmer
Ntumu 11 12 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 2.3 10.5 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid FAN Farmer
Bulu 22 13 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 3.0 11.0 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid BUM Farmer
Eton 4 17 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 4.3 11.5 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid ETO Farmer
Wimbum 15 21 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 6.5 10.8 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid LMP Farmer
Batie 16 20 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 4.3 11.0 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid BBJ Farmer
Ewondo 3 16 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 3.8 11.5 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid EWO Farmer
Kanuri 31 18 Africa Central Africa Cameroon 11.3 14.3 Nilo-Saharan Saharan KNC Farmer
Biaka x 23 27 Africa Central Africa C.A.R 4.0 17.0 Niger-Kordofanian Adamawa-Ubangi GDI Hunter-Gatherer Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Mbum 13 20 Africa Central Africa C.A.R 5.5 13.5 Niger-Kordofanian Adamawa-Ubangi MDD Farmer
Yakoma 6 20 Africa Central Africa C.A.R 4.3 22.3 Niger-Kordofanian Adamawa-Ubangi YKY Farmer
Gbaya 15 20 Africa Central Africa C.A.R 5.0 15.0 Niger-Kordofanian Adamawa-Ubangi GYA Farmer
Laka 33 18 Africa Central Africa Chad 8.0 16.0 Nilo-Saharan Central Sudanic LAP Farmer
Ngambaye 30 19 Africa Central Africa Chad 9.0 16.0 Nilo-Saharan Central Sudanic SBA Farmer
Kaba 27 19 Africa Central Africa Chad 8.0 16.8 Nilo-Saharan Central Sudanic KSP Farmer
Bulala 15 18 Africa Central Africa Chad 13.0 18.0 Nilo-Saharan Central Sudanic MNE Farmer (with fishing)
Kanembou 5 18 Africa Central Africa Chad 14.0 15.0 Nilo-Saharan Saharan KBL Mixed Farmer
Table S1.  Populations used in the current study
Population Name CEPH n
%Missing 
1327 
markers
Continent Region (UN Statistics Division geoscheme with exceptions) Country Latitude Longitude
Language 
Family
Language Major 
Subgrouping
ISO 639-3 
Language 
Code
Subsistence Notes
Sara 27 20 Africa Central Africa Chad 8.0 17.5 Nilo-Saharan Central Sudanic Farmer combination of Sara Madjingaye, Sara Gor, Sa
Baluba 6 23 Africa Central Africa D.R.C. -9.0 25.0 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid LUA Farmer
Kongo 17 19 Africa Central Africa D.R.C. -5.5 15.0 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid KNG Farmer
Barega 4 18 Africa Central Africa D.R.C. -3.5 28.0 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid LEA Farmer
Mbuti x 13 28 Africa Central Africa D.R.C. 1.0 29.0 Nilo-Saharan Central Sudanic LES Hunter-Gatherer Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Tutsi/Hutu 8 18 Africa Central Africa Rwanda -2.0 30.0 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid KIN Mixed Farmer Mixed Sample
Dinka 17 14 Africa Central Africa (deviation from UN claSudan 8.0 30.0 Nilo-Saharan Eastern Sudanic DIP Herder
Nuer 18 46 Africa Central Africa (deviation from UN claSudan 8.5 31.0 Nilo-Saharan Eastern Sudanic NUS Herder
Shilluk 15 45 Africa Central Africa (deviation from UN claSudan 10.0 32.0 Nilo-Saharan Eastern Sudanic SHK Herder
Nyimang 12 42 Africa Central Africa (deviation from UN claSudan 12.3 29.5 Nilo-Saharan Eastern Sudanic NYI Herder
Hadza 63 18 Africa Eastern Africa Tanzania -3.8 35.3 Khoesan Hadza HTS Hunter-Gatherer
Sandawe 51 18 Africa Eastern Africa Tanzania -5.5 35.5 Khoesan Sandawe SAD Hunter-Gatherer
Iraqw 46 18 Africa Eastern Africa Tanzania -4.0 35.5 Afroasiatic Cushitic IRK Mixed Farmer
Burunge 22 19 Africa Eastern Africa Tanzania -5.3 36.0 Afroasiatic Cushitic BDS Mixed Farmer
Fiome 22 15 Africa Eastern Africa Tanzania -4.3 35.8 Afroasiatic Cushitic GOW Mixed Farmer
Mbugu 22 18 Africa Eastern Africa Tanzania -4.8 38.5 mixed A.A. and N.K. MHD Mixed Farmer
Maasai 36 18 Africa Eastern Africa Tanzania -4.0 37.0 Nilo-Saharan Eastern Sudanic MAS Herder
Akie 23 16 Africa Eastern Africa Tanzania -5.0 37.5 Nilo-Saharan Eastern Sudanic OKI Hunter-Gatherer
Datog 54 15 Africa Eastern Africa Tanzania -4.5 35.5 Nilo-Saharan Eastern Sudanic TCC Herder
Turu 32 18 Africa Eastern Africa Tanzania -5.0 35.0 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid RIM Mixed Farmer
Sukuma 10 13 Africa Eastern Africa Tanzania -3.0 33.5 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid SUK Mixed Farmer
Gogo 13 15 Africa Eastern Africa Tanzania -6.0 36.0 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid GOG Mixed Farmer
Mbugwe 21 18 Africa Eastern Africa Tanzania -3.8 35.8 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid MGZ Mixed Farmer
Rangi 36 19 Africa Eastern Africa Tanzania -5.0 36.0 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid LAG Mixed Farmer
Sambaa 18 14 Africa Eastern Africa Tanzania -4.5 38.3 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid KSB Mixed Farmer
Pare 23 18 Africa Eastern Africa Tanzania -4.5 38.0 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid ASA Mixed Farmer
Gabra 17 19 Africa Eastern Africa Kenya 3.0 37.5 Afroasiatic Cushitic GAX Herder
Borana 32 21 Africa Eastern Africa Kenya 3.0 38.0 Afroasiatic Cushitic GAX Herder
Wata 6 24 Africa Eastern Africa Kenya 3.5 37.0 Afroasiatic Cushitic BOB Hunter-Gatherer
Rendille 28 18 Africa Eastern Africa Kenya 2.3 37.5 Afroasiatic Cushitic REL Herder
El Molo 16 18 Africa Eastern Africa Kenya 2.8 36.8 Afroasiatic Cushitic ELO Hunter-Gatherer
Yaaku 19 13 Africa Eastern Africa Kenya 0.5 37.0 Afroasiatic Cushitic MUU Hunter-Gatherer
Mumonyot Maasai 12 13 Africa Eastern Africa Kenya 0.6 37.0 Nilo-Saharan Eastern Sudanic MAS Herder
Il'gwesi Maasai 21 14 Africa Eastern Africa Kenya 0.3 36.8 Nilo-Saharan Eastern Sudanic MAS Herder
Dorobo 10 16 Africa Eastern Africa Tanzania -5.0 37.0 Nilo-Saharan Eastern Sudanic MWX Hunter-Gatherer
Tugen 22 19 Africa Eastern Africa Kenya 0.8 35.8 Nilo-Saharan Eastern Sudanic TUY Herder
Samburu 18 13 Africa Eastern Africa Kenya 1.5 37.0 Nilo-Saharan Eastern Sudanic SAQ Herder
Marakwet 14 19 Africa Eastern Africa Kenya 1.3 35.5 Nilo-Saharan Eastern Sudanic ENB Herder
Sengwer 21 18 Africa Eastern Africa Kenya 1.0 35.0 Nilo-Saharan Eastern Sudanic KLN Hunter-Gatherer
Okiek 22 18 Africa Eastern Africa Kenya 0.3 36.0 Nilo-Saharan Eastern Sudanic OKI Hunter-Gatherer
Nandi 11 21 Africa Eastern Africa Kenya 0.0 35.5 Nilo-Saharan Eastern Sudanic KLN Herder
Sabaot 20 19 Africa Eastern Africa Kenya 1.0 34.8 Nilo-Saharan Eastern Sudanic SPY Herder
Turkana 26 19 Africa Eastern Africa Kenya 3.0 36.0 Nilo-Saharan Eastern Sudanic TUV Herder
Pokot 23 19 Africa Eastern Africa Kenya 1.5 35.5 Nilo-Saharan Eastern Sudanic PKO Herder
Maasai Ilchamus 27 19 Africa Eastern Africa Kenya 1.5 37.1 Nilo-Saharan Eastern Sudanic MAS Herder
Luo 28 18 Africa Eastern Africa Kenya -0.5 34.5 Nilo-Saharan Eastern Sudanic LUO Herder
Kenya Bantu x 11 28 Africa Eastern Africa Kenya -3.0 37.0 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid Farmer Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Kikuyu 22 21 Africa Eastern Africa Kenya -1.0 37.0 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid KIK Farmer
Luhya 17 19 Africa Eastern Africa Kenya 0.5 34.5 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid LUY Farmer
Burji 24 17 Africa Eastern Africa Ethiopia 5.5 37.8 Afroasiatic Cushitic BJI Mixed Farmer
Konso 14 17 Africa Eastern Africa Ethiopia 5.5 37.5 Afroasiatic Cushitic KXC Mixed Farmer
Beta Israel 17 19 Africa Eastern Africa Ethiopia 12.0 38.0 Afroasiatic Semitic AMH Mixed Farmer
Cape Mixed Ancestry 39 27 Africa Southern Africa South Africa -34.0 18.5 ENG
San x 6 27 Africa Southern Africa Namibia -21.0 20.0 Khoesan Southern KTZ Hunter-Gatherer Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
!Xun/Khoe 8 28 Africa Southern Africa South Africa -30.0 18.0 Khoesan Southern XUU Hunter-Gatherer Mixed Sample, Tishkoff et al. 2007
Xhosa 28 22 Africa Southern Africa South Africa -32.0 28.0 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid XHO Mixed Farmer
Venda 13 27 Africa Southern Africa South Africa -22.5 30.0 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid VEN Mixed Farmer
South Bantu x 8 27 Africa Southern Africa South Africa an -25.6 24.3 Niger-Kordofanian Bantoid Mixed Farmer Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Chicago 15 14 U.S.A. ENG
Pittsburgh 21 13 U.S.A. ENG
Baltimore 44 13 U.S.A. ENG
North Carolina 18 14 U.S.A. ENG
Table S1.  Populations used in the current study
Population Name CEPH n
%Missing 
1327 
markers
Continent Region (UN Statistics Division geoscheme with exceptions) Country Latitude Longitude
Language 
Family
Language Major 
Subgrouping
ISO 639-3 
Language 
Code
Subsistence Notes
Orcadian x 15 27 Eurasia Northern Europe U.K. 59.0 -3.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Adygei x 17 27 Eurasia Eastern Europe Russia 44.0 39.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Russian x 25 31 Eurasia Eastern Europe Russia 61.0 40.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Basque x 24 28 Eurasia Western Europe France 43.0 0.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
French x 28 28 Eurasia Western Europe France 46.0 2.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Italian x 21 28 Eurasia Southern Europe Italy 44.5 10.5 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Sardinian x 28 28 Eurasia Southern Europe Italy 40.0 9.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Bedouin x 46 27 Eurasia Western Asia Israel 31.0 35.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Druze x 42 28 Eurasia Western Asia Israel 32.0 35.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Palestinian x 46 28 Eurasia Western Asia Israel 32.0 35.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Temani 21 24 Eurasia Western Asia Yemen 15.0 45.0 Afroasiatic Semitic JYE
Balochi x 24 28 Eurasia Southern Asia Pakistan 30.5 66.5 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Brahui x 25 28 Eurasia Southern Asia Pakistan 30.5 66.5 Dravidian BRH Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Makrani x 25 28 Eurasia Southern Asia Pakistan 25.0 20.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Sindhi x 24 27 Eurasia Southern Asia Pakistan 26.0 69.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Pathan x 24 27 Eurasia Southern Asia Pakistan 25.0 20.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Burusho x 25 27 Eurasia Southern Asia Pakistan 36.5 74.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Hazara x 22 29 Eurasia Southern Asia Pakistan 33.5 70.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Uygur x 10 28 Eurasia Eastern Asia China 44.0 81.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Kalash x 23 28 Eurasia Southern Asia Pakistan 36.0 71.5 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Parsi 25 11 Eurasia Southern Asia India 19.0 72.8 Rosenberg et al. 2006
Kashmiri 25 11 Eurasia Southern Asia India 32.4 74.5 Rosenberg et al. 2006
Punjabi 28 12 Eurasia Southern Asia India 30.5 75.3 Rosenberg et al. 2006
Hindi 28 11 Eurasia Southern Asia India 27.0 78.4 Rosenberg et al. 2006
Marwari 25 11 Eurasia Southern Asia India 26.7 74.3 Rosenberg et al. 2006
Gujarat 50 11 Eurasia Southern Asia India 23.0 72.0 Rosenberg et al. 2006
Marathi 26 11 Eurasia Southern Asia India 19.8 75.9 Rosenberg et al. 2006
Kannada 24 11 Eurasia Southern Asia India 15.0 75.0 Rosenberg et al. 2006
Konkani 42 11 Eurasia Southern Asia India 14.6 75.1 Rosenberg et al. 2006
Malayalam 25 11 Eurasia Southern Asia India 10.0 76.3 Rosenberg et al. 2006
Tamil 29 11 Eurasia Southern Asia India 11.1 78.0 Rosenberg et al. 2006
Telugu 27 11 Eurasia Southern Asia India 15.9 79.6 Rosenberg et al. 2006
Oriya 26 11 Eurasia Southern Asia India 20.0 85.0 Rosenberg et al. 2006
Bengali 27 11 Eurasia Southern Asia India 23.3 87.7 Rosenberg et al. 2006
Assamese 25 11 Eurasia Southern Asia India 26.0 93.0 Rosenberg et al. 2006
Han x 44 28 Eurasia Eastern Asia China 32.5 114.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Dai x 10 28 Eurasia Eastern Asia China 21.0 100.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Daur x 10 28 Eurasia Eastern Asia China 48.5 124.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Hezhen x 9 28 Eurasia Eastern Asia China 47.5 133.5 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Lahu x 8 28 Eurasia Eastern Asia China 22.0 100.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Miao x 10 27 Eurasia Eastern Asia China 28.0 109.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Oroqen x 9 27 Eurasia Eastern Asia China 50.5 126.5 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
She x 10 28 Eurasia Eastern Asia China 27.0 119.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Tujia x 10 29 Eurasia Eastern Asia China 29.0 109.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Tu x 10 27 Eurasia Eastern Asia China 36.0 101.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Xibo x 9 28 Eurasia Eastern Asia China 43.5 81.5 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Yi x 10 27 Eurasia Eastern Asia China 28.0 103.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Mongola x 10 28 Eurasia Eastern Asia China 48.5 119.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Naxi x 9 28 Eurasia Eastern Asia China 26.0 100.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Cambodian x 10 29 Eurasia Southeastern Asia Cambodia 12.0 105.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Japanese x 29 28 Eurasia Eastern Asia Japan 38.0 138.0 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Yakut x 25 28 Eurasia Eastern Asia (deviation from UN clasRussia 63.0 129.5 Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Melanesian x 11 28 Oceania Melanesia Papua New Guinea Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Papuan x 17 28 Oceania Melanesia Papua New Guinea Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Australian 10 13 Oceania Australia Australia Hunter-Gatherer
Karitiana x 14 29 America South America Brazil Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Surui x 8 30 America South America Brazil Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Columbian x 7 28 America South America Columbia Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Maya x 21 30 America Central America Mexico Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Pima x 14 29 America Central America Mexico Cann et al. 2002, Rosenberg et al. 2005
Table S2a.  Allele length adjustments between the CEPH-HGDP data and the Africa1 dataset
ID, previous (CEPH-
HGDP) ID, new (Africa1)
adjustment (bp, 
added to previous 
length) Other ID
ATA31G11 ATA31G11P 7 D10S1412
UT2095 UT2095M 1 D11S1304
GATA6B09 GATA6B09P 7 D11S1392
GGAA17G05 GGAA17G05P 7 D11S1984
GATA23E06 GATA23E06L 3 D11S1998
GATA23F06 GATA23F06L 3 D11S1999
GATA28D01 GATA28D01M 1 D11S2000
ATA27A06 ATA27A06P 7 D12S1042
ATA29A06 ATA29A06P 7 D12S1045
GATA26D02 GATA26D02M 1 D12S1052
GATA63D12 GATA63D12P 7 D12S1064
GATA85A04 GATA85A04M 1 D12S1300
GATA91H06 GATA91H06M 1 D12S1301
ATA25F09 ATA25F09M 1 D12S2070
GATA11C08 GATA11C08P 7 D13S1807
GATA23C03 GATA23C03P 7 D13S787
GATA51B02 GATA51B02M 1 D13S796
GATA136B01 GATA136B01M 1 D14S1426
GGAA10C09 GGAA10C09P 7 D14S587
GATA43H01 GATA43H01M 1 D14S608
GGAA21G11 GGAA21G11L 2 D14S617
GATA197B10 GATA197B10P 7 D15S1515
ATA28G05 ATA28G05P 7 D15S655
GATA73F01 GATA73F01M 1 D15S816
GATA81D12 GATA81D12M 1 D16S2624
GATA22F09 GATA22F09P 7 D16S3253
GAAT2C03 GAAT2C03P 7 D17S1298
ATC6A06 ATC6A06M 1 D17S2180
ATA43A10Z ATA43A10M 1 D17S2193
ATA58A02 ATA58A02P 7 D17S2195
GATA29B01 GATA29B01L -1 D19S589
GATA44F10 GATA44F10P 7 D19S591
GATA26G09 GATA26G09P 7 D1S1596
GGAA3A07 GGAA3A07M 1 D1S1612
ATA25E07 ATA25E07M 1 D1S1627
ATA29C07 ATA29C07L -2 D1S3462
GATA29A05 GATA29A05P 7 D1S3669
GATA29F06 GATA29F06z 1 D20S477
UT1355 UT1355z -1 D21S1411
GGAA10F06 GGAA10F06M 1 D22S686
ATA27D04 ATA27D04P 7 D2S1352
GATA52A04 GATA52A04M 1 D2S1384
GATA65C03 GATA65C03M 1 D2S1391
GATA69E12 GATA69E12M 1 D2S1394
GGAA20G10 GGAA20G10M 1 D2S1400
GATA86E02 GATA86E02P 7 D2S1788
GATA30E06 GATA30E06P 7 D2S2944
GATA178G09 GATA178G09M 1 D2S2968
GATA3C02 GATA3C02M 1 D3S1744
GATA8B05 GATA8B05M 1 D3S1768
GGAA4B09 GGAA4B09N 1 D3S2403
GATA22F11 GATA22F11NZ -58 D3S2427
GATA27C08 GATA27C08P 7 D3S2432
GATA128C02 GATA128C02M 1 D3S4529
GATA164B08 GATA164B08P 7 D3S4545
GATA7D01 GATA7D01ZP -37 D4S1627
GATA5B02 GATA5B02M 1 D4S1652
Table S2a.  Allele length adjustments between the CEPH-HGDP data and the Africa1 dataset
ID, previous (CEPH-
HGDP) ID, new (Africa1)
adjustment (bp, 
added to previous 
length) Other ID
GATA22G05 GATA22G05M 1 D4S2366
ATA27C07 ATA27C07P 7 D4S2397
GATA42H02 GATA42H02P 8 D4S2417
GATA11A11 GATA11A11P 7 D5S1456
GATA3H06 GATA3H06M 1 D5S1462
GATA7C06 GATA7C06M 1 D5S1470
ATA23A10 ATA23A10M 1 D5S1480
GATA89G08 GATA89G08z -27 D5S1725
ATA20G07 ATA20G07M 1 D5S2488
GGAT3H10 GGAT3H10M 1 D6S1017
ATA11D10 ATA11D10M 1 D6S1021
ATA22G07 ATA22G07P 7 D6S1027
GATA165G02 GATA165G02M 1 D6S2436
GATA41G07 GATA41G07M 1 D7S1802
GATA24D12 GATA24D12P 7 D7S1818
GATA73D10 GATA73D10L -4 D7S2204
GATA189C06 GATA189C06M 1 D7S3070
UT7129 UT7129L -1 D8S1048
GATA8G10 GATA8G10M 1 D8S1110
GATA26E03 GATA26E03M 1 D8S1132
GGAA20C10 GGAA20C10M 1 D8S1477
UT721 UT721M 1 D8S373
GATA6B02 GATA6B02P 7 D8S592
GATA81C04 GATA81C04M 1 D9S1120
GATA62F03 GATA62F03M 1 D9S2169
ATA18A07 ATA18A07M 1 D9S910
GATA178F11 GATA178F11z -67 NA-D18S-1
GATA133A08 GATA133A08Q 4 NA-D1S-3
ATA42G12 ATA42G12M 1 NA-D1S-4
SRA SraP 7 TPO-D2S
Table S2b.  Allele length adjustments between the Africa1 dataset and the Africa 2-4 datasets
ID, previous ID, new adjustment
AATA019 AATA019ZP -131
ATA70B03P ATA70B03ZP -124
AFM248VC5 248VC5ZP -135
AFM273YF9 273yf9P -5
GATA109 GATA109Z -130
GATA66D01 GATA66D01ZP -110
GATA23D03N GATA23D03ZP -107
GATA3C02M GATA3C02ZP -25
079yg5P 079YG5ZP 124
TTTAT002Z tttat002 124
GATA72G09N GATA72G09Z 25
GATA62A12 GATA62A12Z -35
165zf8P 165zf8ZP 90
GATA138B05 GATA138B05ZP 49
ATA50C05 ATA50C05ZP 116
035xb9 035xb9ZP -70
GATA24F03 GATA24F03ZP 7
GATA13G11 GATA13G11ZP 45
AATA019 AATA019ZP -131
ATT070 ATT070Z 93
GGAA20C10M GGAA20C10Z -103
GATA84C01 GATA84C01ZP -39
ATA21A03 ATA21A03Z 73
ATA27C11 ATA27C11ZP 78
ATA27A06P ATA27A06N 7
GATA51B02M GATA51B02ZP -45
GGAA22G01 GGAA22G01ZP 17
ATA70B03P ATA70B03ZP -124
ATA77F05 ATA77F05Z 74
GGAA30H04 GGAA30H04ZP -103
GATA169E06 GATA169E06ZP 38
ATAC026P ATAC026 7
AFM273YF9 273yf9P -5
AFM248VC5 248VC5ZP -135
204zg5P 204ZG5ZP 115
AAT107 AAT107Z -53
095tc5P 095TC5ZP 31
AAT200 AAT200ZP -137
AAT263P AAT263ZP -127
GATA138B05 GATA138B05P -7
ATA11D10M ATA11D10Z 26
marker from bp to bp
GATA88H02N 275 274
GATA88H02N 271 270
GATA88H02N 267 266
GATA88H02N 263 262
GATA88H02N 259 258
GATA88H02N 255 254
GATA88H02N 251 250
GATA88H02N 247 246
GATAH05 219 220
GATAH05 223 224
GATAH05 227 228
GATAH05 231 232
GATAH05 235 236
GATAH05 239 240
GATAH05 243 244
GATAH05 247 248
GATAH05 251 252
GATA86E02P 181 182
GATA86E02P 177 178
GATA86E02P 173 174
GATA86E02P 169 170
GATA86E02P 165 166
GATA86E02P 161 162
ATA28B11 240 239
TAGA031z 363 362
TAGA031z 359 358
TAGA031z 357 356
TAGA031z 355 354
GGAA10C09P 288 289
GGAA10C09P 284 285
GGAA10C09P 280 281
GGAA10C09P 276 277
GGAA10C09P 272 273
GGAA10C09P 268 269
GGAA10C09P 264 265
GGAA10C09P 260 261
GGAA10C09P 256 257
GGAA10C09P 252 253
GATA8B01 255 254
GATA8B01 251 250
GATA8B01 247 246
GATA8B01 243 242
GATA8B01 239 238
GATA8B01 235 234
GATA8B01 225 226
UT5029 276 277
UT5029 272 273
UT5029 268 269
UT5029 264 265
UT5029 260 261
ATA33B03Z 101 100
ATA33B03Z 104 103
AGAT114 326 327
AGAT114 322 323
Table S2c.  Allele specific adjustments (only the listed alleles within the 
locus were changed)
marker from bp to bp
Table S2c.  Allele specific adjustments (only the listed alleles within the 
locus were changed)
AGAT114 318 319
AGAT114 314 315
AGAT114 310 311
AGAT114 306 307
AGAT114 302 303
GATA164B08P 223 224
GATA164B08P 219 220
GATA164B08P 215 216
GATA164B08P 211 212
GATA164B08P 207 208
GATA164B08P 203 204
GATA164B08P 199 200
GATA164B08P 195 196
GATA164B08P 187 188
UT1355z 283 284
UT1355z 279 280
UT1355z 275 276
UT1355z 271 272
UT1355z 267 268
GATA91H06M 98 97
Table S3.  Analysis of Molecular Variance (AMOVA) by regions for 848 STRs using GDA
Continent n Populations Group
Among Populations 
within Regions Within Populations # STRs 
Africa CEPH only 105 7 1 - 2.59 (2.45,2.74) 97.41 (97.26,97.55) 783
Africa 2527 120 1 - 1.71 (1.63,1.81) 98.29 (98.20,98.37)
Region
Africa - Eastern 990 42 1 - 1.17 (1.11,1.23) 98.83 (98.77,98.89)
Africa - Western 243 14 1 - 1.18 (1.01,1.38) 98.82 (98.62,99.00)
Africa - Central 1160 56 1 - 1.31 (1.20,1.43) 98.69 (98.57,98.80)
Africa - Saharan 71 3 1 - 1.29 (1.08,1.52) 98.71 (98.48,98.92) 847
Africa - Southern 63 5 1 - 2.13 (1.86,2.38) 97.87 (97.62,98.14) 845
Language Family
Afroasiatic 618 27 1 - 1.29 (1.21,1.38) 98.71 (98.63,98.79)
Khoesan 128 4 1 - 3.39 (3.20,3.58) 96.61 (96.42,96.81) 847
Niger-Kordofanian 1128 59 1 - 1.17 (1.11,1.26) 98.83 (98.75,98.89)
Nilo-Saharan 631 29 1 - 1.13 (0.98,1.31) 98.87 (98.69,99.02)
Subsistence
Farmers 1156 57 1 - 0.97 (0.84,1.10) 99.03 (98.90,99.16)
Mixed Farmers 409 21 1 - 1.07 (1.00,1.15) 98.93 (98.85,99.00)
Hunter-Gatherers 388 16 1 - 3.18 (3.06,3.32) 96.82 (96.68,96.94)
Herders 574 26 1 - 0.94 (0.84,1.03) 99.07 (98.97,99.16) 798
America 64 5 1 - 8.36 (7.97,8.75) 91.64 (91.25,92.03) 783
Oceania 38 3 1 - 4.59 (4.17,5.03) 95.41 (94.97,95.84) 786
Eurasia 1179 52 1 - 1.97 (1.86,2.09) 98.03 (97.91,98.14) 847
Region
Asia 1021 45 1 - 1.94 (1.83,2.05) 98.06 (97.95,98.18)
Europe 128 7 1 - 0.74 (0.67,0.82) 99.26 (99.18,99.33) 783
Continent Grouping n Populations Groups Among Groups
Among Populations 
within Groups Within Populations
Africa Geography (5 regions) 2527 120 5 0.65 (0.60,0.71) 1.28 (1.24,1.32) 98.07 (97.97,98.16)
Africa Language  (4 families) 2505 119 4 0.62 (0.54,0.69) 1.30 (1.27,1.33) 98.08 (97.98,98.19)
Africa Subsistence (4) 2527 120 4 0.44 (0.41,0.48) 1.41 (1.35,1.47) 98.15 (98.05,98.24)
Variance Components and 95% confidence intervals (%)
Variance Components and 95% confidence intervals (%)
Table S4. Genetic by geographic distances analysis 
 
a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b) 
Correlation1 Correlation2 p-value 
Eastern Africa Central Africa 4.62E-42 
Eastern Africa Saharan Africa 7.77E-07 
Eastern Africa Southern Africa 0.2027 
Eastern Africa Western Africa 0.0009 
Central Africa Saharan Africa 0.0203 
Central Africa Southern Africa 0.0025 
Central Africa Western Africa 0.0321 
Saharan Africa Southern Africa 0.0001 
Saharan Africa Western Africa 0.0022 
Southern Africa Western Africa 0.0245 
   
Africa Central Asia 1.65E-05 
Africa Europe 7.78E-13 
Africa Middle East 0.0003 
Africa East Asia 0.0125 
Africa India 8.45E-16 
Central Asia Europe 3.93E-12 
Central Asia Middle East 1.61E-05 
Central Asia East Asia 0.0006 
Central Asia India 0.1454 
Europe Middle East 0.5680 
Europe East Asia 2.99E-08 
Europe India 2.84E-13 
Middle East East Asia 0.0022 
Middle East India 9.29E-05 
East Asia India 0.0016 
 
Model N Spearman’s Rho p-value 
Global Region    
Africa 14042 0.40153 <0.0001 
Central Asia 56 -0.16600 0.2214 
Europe 56 0.82813 <0.0001 
Middle East 12 0.88273 0.0001 
East Asia 272 0.33515 <0.0001 
India 210 0.05653 0.4151 
African Region    
Eastern Africa 1722 0.19239 <0.0001 
Central Africa 2550 0.55188 <0.0001 
Saharan Africa 42 0.75968 <0.0001 
Southern Africa 20 -0.11515 0.6288 
Western Africa 182 0.42623 <0.0001 
Table S5.  Regression of genetic distance on language and geography 
 
 
Full model 
with 
Interactionf 
 
Linguistic 
Distancea 
R2 
p‐value  Geographic 
Distanceb 
R2 
p‐value  Full 
modelc 
R2 
Language 
distance 
after 
adjustment  
p‐valued 
Geographic 
Distance 
after 
adjustment 
p‐valuee 
R2 
Language  
Distance p‐
value  after 
interaction 
adjustment 
Geographic  
Distance p‐
value  after 
interaction 
adjustment h 
Interaction 
p‐value 
NK without 
Pygmies 
0.16  <0.0001  0.02  <0.0001 0.17  <0.0001  0.0003  0.17  <0.0001  0.0097  0.4591 
NK with 
Pygmies 
0.11  <0.0001  0.02  <0.0001 0.12  <0.0001  0.0002  0.12  <0.0001  0.0424  0.99976 
NS  0.06  <0.0001  0.21  <0.0001 0.22  0.0051  <0.0001  0.26  0.0188  <0.0001  0.0002 
AA all  0.20  <0.0001  0.34  <0.0001 0.34  0.0894  <0.0001  0.37  0.1052  <0.0001  0.0006 
Chadic 
only  0.0012  0.7978  0.39 
  
<0.0001 0.4  0.6028     <0.0001  0.4  0.8315    0.0012  0.9237 
Cushitic 
only 
0.29  <0.0001  0.27  <0.0001 0.29  0.0863  0.6723  0.3  0.7587  0.7874  0.1075 
a ‐ Proportion of variance in genetic distance explained by linguistic distance alone (unadjusted for anything else) 
b ‐ Proportion of variance in genetic distance explained by geographic distance alone (unadjusted for anything else) 
c ‐ Proportion of variance in genetic distance explained by linguistic distance and geographic distance together in regression model  
d‐ Significance of linguistic distance effect on genetic distance after adjusting for geographic distance 
e‐ Significance of geographic distance on genetic distance effect after adjusting for linguistic distance 
f ‐ Proportion of variance in genetic distance explained by linguistic distance, geographic distance, and interaction between geographic and 
linguistic distance  
g – p‐value for effect of linguistic distance on genetic distance after adjusting for geography and interaction 
h ‐ p‐value for effect of geographic distance on genetic distance after adjusting for language and interaction 
 
Table S6.  Proportion of AACs from unsupervised STRUCTURE runs in Cape Mixed Ancestry and African American Populations
Populations Fulani Nilo-Saharan Oceania
Chadic-
Saharan
Southern 
African 
Khoesan
Niger-
Kordofanian East Asia Hadza Sandawe Indian Cushitic Pygmy European
Native 
American n
Cape Mixed Ancestry ave 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.25 0.19 0.08 0.00 0.01 0.20 0.03 0.01 0.19 0.01 39
min 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
max 0.14 0.05 0.06 0.06 0.48 0.71 0.21 0.02 0.11 0.69 0.40 0.07 0.86 0.15
Chicago ave 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.70 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.04 0.02 0.01 0.15 0.00 15
min 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.52 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.00
max 0.14 0.01 0.01 0.05 0.04 0.83 0.08 0.01 0.05 0.11 0.06 0.02 0.29 0.01
Pittsburgh ave 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.02 0.01 0.70 0.01 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.02 0.01 0.15 0.01 21
min 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.45 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.00
max 0.03 0.03 0.02 0.05 0.04 0.86 0.03 0.01 0.10 0.15 0.05 0.05 0.36 0.03
Baltimore ave 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.74 0.01 0.00 0.02 0.05 0.02 0.01 0.11 0.00 44
min 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.54 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
max 0.08 0.06 0.04 0.04 0.03 0.88 0.08 0.05 0.10 0.17 0.10 0.07 0.29 0.03
North Carolina ave 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.69 0.02 0.00 0.03 0.06 0.02 0.01 0.15 0.00 18
min 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.38 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00
max 0.03 0.01 0.01 0.06 0.01 0.86 0.05 0.04 0.12 0.15 0.07 0.05 0.41 0.02
All African American ave 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.71 0.01 0.00 0.02 0.05 0.02 0.01 0.13 0.00 98
min 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.38 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
max 0.14 0.06 0.04 0.06 0.04 0.88 0.08 0.05 0.12 0.17 0.10 0.07 0.41 0.03
Populations Fulani 
Nilo-
Saharan Oceanic Chadic SAK
NK non-
Bantu
NK 
Bantu
East 
Asian Indian Cushitic Pygmy European
Native 
American n
Mbororo Dinka PNG Mada San Mandenka Lemande Han Hadza Iraqw Baka French Pima
Cape Mixed Ancestry ave 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.03 0.19 0.04 0.10 0.09 0.01 0.15 0.04 0.02 0.24 0.01 39
min 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
max 0.16 0.19 0.11 0.16 0.42 0.39 0.50 0.25 0.07 0.63 0.32 0.12 0.73 0.12
Chicago ave 0.06 0.03 0.01 0.08 0.01 0.19 0.44 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.10 0.01 15
min 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.04 0.29 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00
max 0.21 0.08 0.02 0.25 0.05 0.35 0.62 0.03 0.02 0.07 0.08 0.06 0.30 0.01
Pittsburgh ave 0.04 0.03 0.00 0.06 0.01 0.21 0.45 0.01 0.01 0.03 0.03 0.02 0.10 0.01 21
min 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.05 0.26 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00
max 0.24 0.16 0.01 0.16 0.01 0.37 0.65 0.03 0.04 0.17 0.07 0.05 0.36 0.02
Baltimore ave 0.03 0.03 0.01 0.07 0.01 0.20 0.50 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.02 0.03 0.06 0.01 44
min 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.03 0.28 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00
max 0.24 0.11 0.03 0.29 0.03 0.39 0.75 0.05 0.05 0.09 0.11 0.11 0.21 0.03
North Carolina ave 0.04 0.03 0.00 0.06 0.01 0.24 0.41 0.01 0.01 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.11 0.01 18
min 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.10 0.08 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00
max 0.20 0.21 0.01 0.15 0.03 0.41 0.63 0.04 0.06 0.09 0.08 0.06 0.39 0.04
Table S7.  Proportion of AACs from supervised STRUCTURE runs  in Cape Mixed Ancestry and African American Populations
Table S8.  Proportion of AACs from the Global Unsupervised Structure Run at K=14
Populations Continent Subregion Fulani
Nilo 
Saharan Oceania
Chadic
Saharan
S.African
Khoesan
Niger
Kordofani
East 
Asian Hadza Sandawe Indian Cushitic
W. 
Pygmy European
Native 
American n
Banuamir Beja Africa Saharan Africa 0.004 0.017 0.001 0.043 0.002 0.045 0.010 0.003 0.009 0.030 0.514 0.003 0.317 0.002 23
Hadandawa Beja Africa Saharan Africa 0.006 0.022 0.001 0.058 0.001 0.040 0.008 0.003 0.006 0.021 0.492 0.004 0.335 0.002 19
Mozabite Africa Saharan Africa 0.142 0.006 0.001 0.017 0.002 0.105 0.007 0.004 0.008 0.026 0.075 0.003 0.602 0.002 29
Mandenka Africa Western Africa 0.081 0.006 0.006 0.044 0.005 0.792 0.006 0.003 0.012 0.013 0.016 0.007 0.007 0.004 22
Dogon Africa Western Africa 0.004 0.005 0.006 0.010 0.164 0.174 0.009 0.002 0.030 0.026 0.117 0.004 0.445 0.004 9
Dioula Africa Western Africa 0.006 0.003 0.006 0.035 0.001 0.904 0.004 0.003 0.008 0.014 0.007 0.003 0.005 0.002 5
Ashanti Africa Western Africa 0.005 0.009 0.001 0.025 0.003 0.901 0.004 0.003 0.012 0.009 0.011 0.009 0.008 0.002 15
Brong Africa Western Africa 0.010 0.006 0.002 0.034 0.002 0.890 0.006 0.003 0.008 0.012 0.016 0.004 0.008 0.002 26
Hausa Africa Western Africa 0.019 0.007 0.003 0.048 0.002 0.864 0.006 0.002 0.008 0.011 0.016 0.005 0.007 0.002 16
Fulani Africa Western Africa 0.360 0.012 0.001 0.053 0.001 0.474 0.004 0.001 0.008 0.012 0.016 0.003 0.054 0.002 4
Yoruba Africa Western Africa 0.003 0.006 0.001 0.015 0.002 0.932 0.004 0.003 0.008 0.008 0.007 0.003 0.006 0.003 25
Yoruba (CEPH) Africa Western Africa 0.004 0.005 0.002 0.016 0.004 0.915 0.004 0.003 0.011 0.009 0.010 0.005 0.009 0.003 22
Igala Africa Western Africa 0.001 0.005 0.001 0.013 0.002 0.931 0.003 0.003 0.009 0.010 0.010 0.005 0.004 0.003 17
Igbo Africa Western Africa 0.004 0.007 0.002 0.009 0.003 0.920 0.003 0.003 0.013 0.009 0.014 0.008 0.005 0.001 28
Gwari Africa Western Africa 0.006 0.008 0.002 0.032 0.002 0.895 0.003 0.003 0.010 0.008 0.019 0.004 0.008 0.002 22
Bassange Africa Western Africa 0.002 0.004 0.001 0.030 0.003 0.913 0.005 0.004 0.006 0.009 0.009 0.003 0.006 0.004 20
Koma Africa Western Africa 0.027 0.068 0.003 0.049 0.071 0.717 0.006 0.004 0.010 0.011 0.008 0.003 0.020 0.004 12
Mada Africa Central Africa 0.002 0.009 0.001 0.477 0.002 0.471 0.004 0.002 0.008 0.005 0.008 0.005 0.004 0.001 28
Ouldeme Africa Central Africa 0.004 0.004 0.001 0.471 0.002 0.477 0.003 0.003 0.006 0.006 0.009 0.006 0.005 0.002 26
Giziga Africa Central Africa 0.005 0.011 0.002 0.371 0.004 0.557 0.003 0.002 0.010 0.009 0.014 0.004 0.007 0.001 24
Mandara Africa Central Africa 0.016 0.023 0.001 0.379 0.003 0.512 0.004 0.003 0.010 0.011 0.023 0.005 0.008 0.002 26
Kotoko Africa Central Africa 0.008 0.023 0.001 0.401 0.002 0.473 0.002 0.005 0.006 0.011 0.035 0.009 0.019 0.003 17
Zulgo Africa Central Africa 0.002 0.007 0.001 0.452 0.001 0.495 0.002 0.002 0.006 0.006 0.010 0.011 0.003 0.001 22
Podokwo Africa Central Africa 0.001 0.009 0.001 0.467 0.002 0.479 0.003 0.004 0.005 0.006 0.010 0.007 0.004 0.002 30
Massa Africa Central Africa 0.002 0.063 0.001 0.352 0.002 0.528 0.003 0.004 0.009 0.006 0.020 0.004 0.004 0.002 15
Hausa Africa Central Africa 0.019 0.007 0.002 0.150 0.003 0.748 0.004 0.003 0.010 0.012 0.021 0.007 0.012 0.002 27
Baggara Africa Central Africa 0.085 0.075 0.002 0.265 0.002 0.360 0.007 0.002 0.010 0.019 0.113 0.006 0.051 0.002 23
Adamawa Fulani Africa Central Africa 0.289 0.008 0.001 0.176 0.002 0.449 0.004 0.002 0.008 0.013 0.016 0.004 0.025 0.004 41
Mbororo Fulani Africa Central Africa 0.627 0.002 0.001 0.016 0.001 0.283 0.005 0.001 0.006 0.013 0.016 0.002 0.026 0.002 13
Tupuri Africa Central Africa 0.003 0.027 0.001 0.325 0.002 0.590 0.003 0.002 0.008 0.008 0.019 0.005 0.007 0.002 22
Baka Africa Central Africa 0.001 0.003 0.001 0.005 0.002 0.326 0.002 0.002 0.004 0.004 0.005 0.642 0.002 0.001 48
Bakola Africa Central Africa 0.001 0.002 0.001 0.005 0.003 0.366 0.002 0.003 0.008 0.005 0.004 0.596 0.002 0.001 42
Bedzan Africa Central Africa 0.002 0.002 0.000 0.004 0.002 0.536 0.002 0.004 0.004 0.006 0.006 0.427 0.003 0.002 17
Mvae Africa Central Africa 0.001 0.009 0.002 0.006 0.004 0.887 0.003 0.002 0.015 0.007 0.016 0.040 0.007 0.001 24
Ngumba Africa Central Africa 0.003 0.007 0.001 0.004 0.002 0.862 0.003 0.005 0.016 0.009 0.013 0.068 0.005 0.002 27
Zime Africa Central Africa 0.001 0.008 0.001 0.018 0.003 0.852 0.003 0.005 0.022 0.008 0.013 0.059 0.005 0.002 30
Bamoun Africa Central Africa 0.003 0.011 0.001 0.010 0.003 0.919 0.003 0.002 0.011 0.007 0.015 0.009 0.005 0.001 31
Banen Africa Central Africa 0.002 0.009 0.002 0.006 0.006 0.914 0.003 0.003 0.013 0.006 0.014 0.015 0.005 0.002 25
Bafia Africa Central Africa 0.002 0.005 0.001 0.010 0.004 0.914 0.004 0.004 0.013 0.007 0.011 0.017 0.005 0.002 30
Lemande Africa Central Africa 0.001 0.005 0.001 0.008 0.002 0.935 0.005 0.004 0.009 0.005 0.008 0.010 0.004 0.002 26
Batanga Africa Central Africa 0.003 0.006 0.001 0.012 0.004 0.896 0.004 0.003 0.016 0.007 0.013 0.030 0.004 0.001 20
Iyassa Africa Central Africa 0.001 0.004 0.001 0.006 0.004 0.891 0.003 0.004 0.018 0.011 0.013 0.026 0.016 0.002 37
Fang Africa Central Africa 0.002 0.009 0.001 0.006 0.003 0.887 0.003 0.005 0.012 0.006 0.016 0.045 0.004 0.001 19
Mabea Africa Central Africa 0.003 0.006 0.001 0.005 0.003 0.883 0.003 0.003 0.010 0.006 0.008 0.064 0.005 0.002 13
Yambassa Africa Central Africa 0.002 0.006 0.001 0.010 0.002 0.917 0.004 0.002 0.019 0.009 0.009 0.012 0.004 0.002 17
South Tikar Africa Central Africa 0.002 0.006 0.002 0.017 0.009 0.897 0.003 0.004 0.013 0.007 0.010 0.023 0.005 0.002 21
North Tikar Africa Central Africa 0.003 0.009 0.001 0.018 0.006 0.891 0.003 0.002 0.023 0.009 0.014 0.015 0.005 0.001 13
Ntumu Africa Central Africa 0.001 0.004 0.001 0.008 0.002 0.922 0.003 0.007 0.011 0.006 0.007 0.018 0.009 0.001 11
Bulu Africa Central Africa 0.001 0.005 0.001 0.008 0.005 0.901 0.002 0.004 0.013 0.010 0.011 0.030 0.006 0.001 22
Eton Africa Central Africa 0.003 0.013 0.002 0.010 0.001 0.895 0.009 0.004 0.008 0.012 0.009 0.029 0.004 0.001 4
Wimbum Africa Central Africa 0.002 0.009 0.004 0.007 0.004 0.908 0.004 0.003 0.019 0.011 0.015 0.007 0.005 0.002 15
Table S8.  Proportion of AACs from the Global Unsupervised Structure Run at K=14
Populations Continent Subregion Fulani
Nilo 
Saharan Oceania
Chadic
Saharan
S.African
Khoesan
Niger
Kordofani
East 
Asian Hadza Sandawe Indian Cushitic
W. 
Pygmy European
Native 
American n
Batie Africa Central Africa 0.001 0.009 0.002 0.008 0.007 0.921 0.003 0.002 0.014 0.008 0.008 0.009 0.003 0.003 16
Ewondo Africa Central Africa 0.002 0.004 0.001 0.021 0.002 0.912 0.002 0.001 0.009 0.005 0.007 0.032 0.003 0.001 3
Kanuri Africa Central Africa 0.023 0.037 0.001 0.296 0.004 0.556 0.005 0.004 0.016 0.008 0.034 0.007 0.008 0.002 31
Biaka Africa Central Africa 0.001 0.003 0.001 0.011 0.006 0.310 0.002 0.001 0.006 0.005 0.005 0.646 0.003 0.001 23
Mbum Africa Central Africa 0.003 0.014 0.002 0.132 0.004 0.809 0.002 0.003 0.007 0.006 0.010 0.003 0.004 0.002 13
Yakoma Africa Central Africa 0.001 0.020 0.002 0.123 0.008 0.749 0.008 0.004 0.014 0.013 0.012 0.043 0.004 0.001 6
Gbaya Africa Central Africa 0.002 0.022 0.001 0.086 0.003 0.822 0.004 0.003 0.006 0.011 0.020 0.012 0.006 0.002 15
Laka Africa Central Africa 0.004 0.010 0.001 0.153 0.005 0.767 0.005 0.004 0.009 0.009 0.019 0.008 0.004 0.002 33
Ngambaye Africa Central Africa 0.003 0.023 0.001 0.192 0.002 0.722 0.005 0.003 0.009 0.011 0.016 0.005 0.005 0.003 30
Kaba Africa Central Africa 0.002 0.016 0.002 0.147 0.004 0.768 0.005 0.003 0.010 0.011 0.019 0.006 0.005 0.003 27
Bulala Africa Central Africa 0.009 0.127 0.001 0.404 0.003 0.342 0.004 0.003 0.009 0.012 0.061 0.004 0.019 0.002 15
Kanembou Africa Central Africa 0.006 0.060 0.004 0.311 0.005 0.408 0.002 0.002 0.011 0.023 0.112 0.003 0.051 0.003 5
Sara Africa Central Africa 0.005 0.026 0.001 0.163 0.002 0.736 0.004 0.004 0.010 0.008 0.027 0.007 0.005 0.002 27
Baluba Africa Central Africa 0.002 0.014 0.001 0.006 0.003 0.909 0.006 0.003 0.012 0.007 0.007 0.025 0.003 0.002 6
Kongo Africa Central Africa 0.001 0.006 0.001 0.007 0.003 0.907 0.003 0.003 0.023 0.010 0.012 0.015 0.006 0.003 17
Barega Africa Central Africa 0.002 0.013 0.001 0.030 0.041 0.826 0.002 0.009 0.042 0.010 0.009 0.011 0.002 0.002 4
Mbuti Africa Central Africa 0.000 0.031 0.001 0.006 0.568 0.134 0.001 0.005 0.011 0.003 0.007 0.230 0.002 0.001 13
Tutsi/Hutu Africa Central Africa 0.001 0.038 0.001 0.004 0.007 0.655 0.005 0.002 0.064 0.016 0.177 0.018 0.011 0.002 8
Dinka Africa Central Africa 0.001 0.522 0.001 0.266 0.003 0.149 0.003 0.004 0.006 0.003 0.033 0.006 0.002 0.001 17
Nuer Africa Central Africa 0.002 0.531 0.001 0.239 0.004 0.142 0.003 0.003 0.010 0.009 0.042 0.008 0.004 0.002 18
Shilluk Africa Central Africa 0.002 0.499 0.001 0.233 0.002 0.198 0.003 0.008 0.006 0.005 0.034 0.004 0.003 0.001 15
Nyimang Africa Central Africa 0.010 0.375 0.001 0.267 0.022 0.154 0.003 0.002 0.011 0.009 0.121 0.005 0.018 0.002 12
Hadza Africa Eastern Africa 0.002 0.006 0.001 0.005 0.003 0.206 0.003 0.671 0.025 0.008 0.057 0.005 0.006 0.003 63
Sandawe Africa Eastern Africa 0.002 0.008 0.001 0.007 0.004 0.171 0.003 0.006 0.688 0.011 0.083 0.004 0.010 0.002 51
Iraqw Africa Eastern Africa 0.002 0.003 0.002 0.004 0.002 0.054 0.009 0.008 0.085 0.013 0.788 0.007 0.018 0.003 46
Burunge Africa Eastern Africa 0.003 0.013 0.001 0.005 0.007 0.248 0.007 0.014 0.285 0.013 0.375 0.016 0.010 0.002 22
Fiome Africa Eastern Africa 0.005 0.008 0.001 0.009 0.004 0.109 0.009 0.012 0.101 0.019 0.691 0.005 0.023 0.003 22
Mbugu Africa Eastern Africa 0.002 0.007 0.002 0.011 0.003 0.293 0.005 0.003 0.034 0.018 0.605 0.004 0.012 0.003 22
Maasai Africa Eastern Africa 0.002 0.136 0.001 0.023 0.006 0.230 0.006 0.008 0.050 0.018 0.486 0.008 0.021 0.004 36
Akie Africa Eastern Africa 0.003 0.032 0.001 0.007 0.004 0.143 0.008 0.006 0.151 0.016 0.600 0.006 0.019 0.004 23
Datog Africa Eastern Africa 0.005 0.050 0.002 0.026 0.003 0.128 0.009 0.007 0.044 0.016 0.683 0.007 0.015 0.005 54
Turu Africa Eastern Africa 0.003 0.010 0.002 0.007 0.006 0.374 0.009 0.009 0.232 0.013 0.312 0.010 0.009 0.004 32
Sukuma Africa Eastern Africa 0.002 0.023 0.004 0.003 0.011 0.677 0.006 0.016 0.106 0.010 0.125 0.006 0.008 0.002 10
Gogo Africa Eastern Africa 0.002 0.014 0.001 0.007 0.017 0.515 0.005 0.009 0.196 0.009 0.205 0.007 0.010 0.004 13
Mbugwe Africa Eastern Africa 0.002 0.013 0.002 0.006 0.006 0.513 0.007 0.008 0.141 0.011 0.265 0.011 0.012 0.004 21
Rangi Africa Eastern Africa 0.001 0.008 0.001 0.007 0.007 0.424 0.006 0.008 0.195 0.016 0.306 0.008 0.010 0.002 36
Sambaa Africa Eastern Africa 0.002 0.007 0.001 0.006 0.007 0.609 0.007 0.002 0.083 0.011 0.242 0.007 0.013 0.004 18
Pare Africa Eastern Africa 0.003 0.006 0.001 0.004 0.011 0.657 0.004 0.005 0.077 0.009 0.206 0.006 0.009 0.002 23
Gabra Africa Eastern Africa 0.005 0.028 0.003 0.037 0.006 0.026 0.016 0.002 0.010 0.055 0.754 0.004 0.052 0.002 17
Borana Africa Eastern Africa 0.005 0.022 0.003 0.027 0.004 0.055 0.011 0.004 0.019 0.037 0.749 0.006 0.055 0.003 32
Wata Africa Eastern Africa 0.005 0.032 0.001 0.040 0.003 0.053 0.011 0.004 0.010 0.032 0.782 0.005 0.021 0.002 6
Rendille Africa Eastern Africa 0.002 0.033 0.002 0.028 0.002 0.042 0.005 0.002 0.006 0.036 0.743 0.003 0.089 0.006 28
El Molo Africa Eastern Africa 0.002 0.217 0.001 0.022 0.003 0.109 0.004 0.002 0.020 0.015 0.576 0.008 0.020 0.002 16
Yaaku Africa Eastern Africa 0.002 0.113 0.001 0.011 0.003 0.098 0.005 0.002 0.026 0.014 0.694 0.006 0.018 0.006 19
Mumonyot Maasai Africa Eastern Africa 0.009 0.182 0.001 0.017 0.005 0.156 0.005 0.011 0.030 0.016 0.535 0.007 0.023 0.002 12
Il'gwesi Maasai Africa Eastern Africa 0.005 0.166 0.005 0.020 0.002 0.165 0.007 0.007 0.028 0.017 0.558 0.007 0.010 0.002 21
Dorobo Africa Eastern Africa 0.003 0.154 0.004 0.017 0.004 0.160 0.005 0.008 0.078 0.012 0.531 0.009 0.012 0.003 10
Tugen Africa Eastern Africa 0.007 0.506 0.002 0.025 0.002 0.087 0.005 0.006 0.012 0.015 0.312 0.005 0.012 0.003 22
Samburu Africa Eastern Africa 0.003 0.160 0.002 0.031 0.005 0.090 0.005 0.004 0.017 0.023 0.625 0.006 0.027 0.002 18
Marakwet Africa Eastern Africa 0.003 0.567 0.001 0.008 0.003 0.053 0.003 0.008 0.018 0.009 0.312 0.007 0.006 0.002 14
Sengwer Africa Eastern Africa 0.002 0.531 0.002 0.019 0.003 0.069 0.008 0.004 0.014 0.008 0.323 0.007 0.009 0.002 21
Table S8.  Proportion of AACs from the Global Unsupervised Structure Run at K=14
Populations Continent Subregion Fulani
Nilo 
Saharan Oceania
Chadic
Saharan
S.African
Khoesan
Niger
Kordofani
East 
Asian Hadza Sandawe Indian Cushitic
W. 
Pygmy European
Native 
American n
Okiek Africa Eastern Africa 0.005 0.280 0.001 0.007 0.003 0.105 0.006 0.006 0.034 0.011 0.522 0.005 0.012 0.002 22
Nandi Africa Eastern Africa 0.002 0.345 0.001 0.015 0.003 0.247 0.005 0.003 0.014 0.020 0.322 0.008 0.012 0.003 11
Sabaot Africa Eastern Africa 0.002 0.400 0.001 0.019 0.004 0.310 0.003 0.010 0.031 0.009 0.192 0.008 0.009 0.003 20
Turkana Africa Eastern Africa 0.002 0.361 0.001 0.090 0.007 0.220 0.004 0.006 0.029 0.012 0.245 0.010 0.008 0.002 26
Pokot Africa Eastern Africa 0.002 0.544 0.001 0.029 0.006 0.069 0.003 0.004 0.014 0.007 0.306 0.007 0.008 0.001 23
Maasai Ilchamus Africa Eastern Africa 0.003 0.296 0.002 0.013 0.004 0.119 0.009 0.005 0.020 0.022 0.477 0.006 0.019 0.005 27
Luo Africa Eastern Africa 0.002 0.129 0.003 0.022 0.013 0.680 0.004 0.005 0.066 0.011 0.047 0.012 0.004 0.002 28
Kenya Bantu Africa Eastern Africa 0.001 0.118 0.001 0.008 0.016 0.681 0.006 0.003 0.054 0.009 0.064 0.018 0.017 0.003 11
Kikuyu Africa Eastern Africa 0.003 0.078 0.001 0.010 0.011 0.433 0.006 0.003 0.062 0.011 0.356 0.010 0.010 0.005 22
Luhya Africa Eastern Africa 0.002 0.135 0.002 0.008 0.012 0.664 0.003 0.004 0.080 0.007 0.065 0.010 0.005 0.002 17
Burji Africa Eastern Africa 0.006 0.015 0.004 0.010 0.007 0.073 0.007 0.006 0.038 0.032 0.736 0.017 0.045 0.004 24
Konso Africa Eastern Africa 0.003 0.008 0.006 0.018 0.011 0.032 0.010 0.008 0.045 0.032 0.764 0.031 0.029 0.002 14
Beta Israel Africa Eastern Africa 0.003 0.023 0.001 0.028 0.013 0.030 0.007 0.003 0.012 0.030 0.565 0.007 0.274 0.003 17
Cape Mixed Ancestry Africa Southern Africa 0.006 0.005 0.006 0.005 0.247 0.190 0.081 0.003 0.014 0.197 0.031 0.012 0.192 0.010 39
San Africa Southern Africa 0.001 0.002 0.001 0.003 0.806 0.028 0.001 0.008 0.011 0.003 0.019 0.114 0.002 0.001 6
!Xun/Khoe Africa Southern Africa 0.001 0.007 0.001 0.003 0.689 0.181 0.001 0.003 0.007 0.003 0.007 0.091 0.003 0.001 8
Xhosa Africa Southern Africa 0.002 0.004 0.001 0.004 0.367 0.566 0.003 0.002 0.011 0.009 0.008 0.006 0.013 0.003 28
Venda Africa Southern Africa 0.002 0.002 0.002 0.006 0.173 0.771 0.003 0.001 0.006 0.012 0.005 0.010 0.005 0.002 13
South Bantu Africa Southern Africa 0.002 0.004 0.001 0.004 0.180 0.762 0.002 0.002 0.013 0.005 0.011 0.010 0.005 0.001 8
Chicago 0.028 0.004 0.002 0.012 0.007 0.702 0.012 0.002 0.012 0.036 0.022 0.006 0.149 0.005 15
Pittsburgh 0.006 0.006 0.002 0.015 0.008 0.700 0.009 0.003 0.018 0.045 0.019 0.008 0.155 0.006 21
Baltimore 0.007 0.009 0.003 0.010 0.004 0.735 0.014 0.004 0.018 0.049 0.019 0.012 0.112 0.005 44
North Carolina 0.003 0.004 0.002 0.011 0.004 0.685 0.017 0.004 0.027 0.056 0.016 0.011 0.154 0.005 18
Orcadian Eurasia Northern Europe 0.001 0.001 0.002 0.002 0.004 0.007 0.007 0.001 0.003 0.127 0.003 0.002 0.836 0.005 15
Adygei Eurasia Eastern Europe 0.001 0.001 0.002 0.002 0.001 0.007 0.034 0.001 0.003 0.244 0.005 0.001 0.692 0.004 17
Russian Eurasia Eastern Europe 0.001 0.002 0.002 0.002 0.002 0.007 0.069 0.002 0.003 0.174 0.004 0.002 0.717 0.013 25
Basque Eurasia Western Europe 0.001 0.001 0.002 0.002 0.001 0.007 0.011 0.003 0.004 0.048 0.004 0.002 0.907 0.005 24
French Eurasia Western Europe 0.001 0.002 0.003 0.002 0.001 0.007 0.016 0.002 0.005 0.101 0.004 0.002 0.848 0.007 28
Italian Eurasia Southern Europe 0.002 0.003 0.003 0.002 0.002 0.008 0.014 0.002 0.005 0.086 0.007 0.002 0.862 0.003 21
Sardinian Eurasia Southern Europe 0.003 0.004 0.002 0.002 0.002 0.008 0.008 0.002 0.004 0.035 0.006 0.002 0.919 0.003 28
Bedouin Eurasia Western Asia 0.003 0.007 0.003 0.014 0.003 0.032 0.008 0.003 0.015 0.047 0.106 0.002 0.754 0.003 46
Druze Eurasia Western Asia 0.001 0.004 0.002 0.004 0.001 0.015 0.007 0.002 0.006 0.103 0.019 0.002 0.831 0.002 42
Palestinian Eurasia Western Asia 0.006 0.004 0.003 0.013 0.003 0.027 0.012 0.002 0.012 0.094 0.061 0.004 0.757 0.003 46
Temani Eurasia Western Asia 0.003 0.002 0.001 0.005 0.003 0.014 0.008 0.003 0.007 0.056 0.120 0.002 0.774 0.002 21
Balochi Eurasia Southern Asia 0.002 0.003 0.001 0.003 0.001 0.021 0.008 0.002 0.006 0.503 0.008 0.003 0.435 0.004 24
Brahui Eurasia Southern Asia 0.001 0.002 0.001 0.003 0.003 0.024 0.008 0.001 0.004 0.476 0.007 0.002 0.462 0.005 25
Makrani Eurasia Southern Asia 0.001 0.003 0.003 0.004 0.006 0.038 0.013 0.003 0.013 0.465 0.014 0.006 0.430 0.003 25
Sindhi Eurasia Southern Asia 0.001 0.002 0.005 0.002 0.001 0.032 0.011 0.001 0.005 0.606 0.007 0.003 0.316 0.007 24
Pathan Eurasia Southern Asia 0.001 0.002 0.002 0.002 0.001 0.007 0.030 0.001 0.005 0.582 0.006 0.003 0.351 0.007 24
Burusho Eurasia Southern Asia 0.001 0.002 0.009 0.002 0.002 0.006 0.098 0.002 0.004 0.555 0.004 0.002 0.300 0.013 25
Hazara Eurasia Southern Asia 0.001 0.002 0.003 0.001 0.001 0.006 0.427 0.001 0.004 0.227 0.005 0.002 0.307 0.013 22
Uygur Eurasia Eastern Asia 0.001 0.001 0.002 0.001 0.001 0.007 0.454 0.002 0.003 0.235 0.003 0.001 0.280 0.010 10
Kalash Eurasia Southern Asia 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.002 0.001 0.004 0.006 0.001 0.002 0.567 0.002 0.001 0.398 0.012 23
Parsi Eurasia Southern Asia 0.001 0.002 0.001 0.003 0.001 0.009 0.003 0.001 0.004 0.490 0.006 0.002 0.476 0.002 25
Kashmiri Eurasia Southern Asia 0.001 0.002 0.003 0.002 0.002 0.008 0.015 0.002 0.005 0.724 0.006 0.002 0.226 0.003 25
Punjabi Eurasia Southern Asia 0.001 0.001 0.002 0.002 0.001 0.007 0.009 0.001 0.004 0.753 0.004 0.002 0.209 0.004 28
Hindi Eurasia Southern Asia 0.001 0.002 0.004 0.003 0.002 0.009 0.011 0.002 0.005 0.853 0.006 0.002 0.095 0.006 28
Marwari Eurasia Southern Asia 0.001 0.001 0.003 0.003 0.001 0.007 0.009 0.001 0.004 0.929 0.006 0.002 0.030 0.003 25
Gujarat Eurasia Southern Asia 0.001 0.002 0.002 0.002 0.001 0.007 0.011 0.002 0.003 0.929 0.005 0.002 0.032 0.002 50
Marathi Eurasia Southern Asia 0.001 0.002 0.003 0.002 0.001 0.007 0.008 0.001 0.004 0.867 0.006 0.003 0.092 0.004 26
Kannada Eurasia Southern Asia 0.001 0.002 0.003 0.003 0.001 0.008 0.026 0.003 0.005 0.874 0.006 0.002 0.061 0.005 24
Table S8.  Proportion of AACs from the Global Unsupervised Structure Run at K=14
Populations Continent Subregion Fulani
Nilo 
Saharan Oceania
Chadic
Saharan
S.African
Khoesan
Niger
Kordofani
East 
Asian Hadza Sandawe Indian Cushitic
W. 
Pygmy European
Native 
American n
Konkani Eurasia Southern Asia 0.001 0.002 0.001 0.002 0.001 0.006 0.011 0.001 0.004 0.866 0.005 0.002 0.096 0.002 42
Malayalam Eurasia Southern Asia 0.001 0.002 0.002 0.002 0.002 0.010 0.020 0.002 0.005 0.901 0.006 0.002 0.041 0.004 25
Tamil Eurasia Southern Asia 0.001 0.002 0.004 0.002 0.002 0.008 0.015 0.001 0.005 0.855 0.006 0.002 0.095 0.003 29
Telugu Eurasia Southern Asia 0.001 0.002 0.002 0.002 0.002 0.008 0.019 0.001 0.004 0.903 0.005 0.002 0.044 0.004 27
Oriya Eurasia Southern Asia 0.001 0.002 0.004 0.002 0.003 0.008 0.049 0.002 0.005 0.861 0.005 0.003 0.050 0.006 26
Bengali Eurasia Southern Asia 0.001 0.002 0.005 0.002 0.002 0.009 0.063 0.001 0.006 0.834 0.007 0.001 0.062 0.005 27
Assamese Eurasia Southern Asia 0.001 0.003 0.002 0.003 0.002 0.010 0.139 0.001 0.005 0.772 0.006 0.002 0.049 0.004 25
Han Eurasia Eastern Asia 0.001 0.002 0.003 0.002 0.001 0.007 0.934 0.001 0.004 0.022 0.005 0.002 0.009 0.007 44
Dai Eurasia Eastern Asia 0.001 0.001 0.002 0.002 0.001 0.009 0.923 0.003 0.003 0.034 0.004 0.002 0.009 0.004 10
Daur Eurasia Eastern Asia 0.001 0.001 0.003 0.001 0.001 0.005 0.896 0.001 0.003 0.045 0.003 0.002 0.022 0.016 10
Hezhen Eurasia Eastern Asia 0.000 0.001 0.002 0.001 0.001 0.005 0.901 0.001 0.002 0.049 0.002 0.001 0.013 0.022 9
Lahu Eurasia Eastern Asia 0.001 0.002 0.001 0.002 0.001 0.007 0.920 0.001 0.006 0.032 0.006 0.002 0.017 0.003 8
Miao Eurasia Eastern Asia 0.001 0.001 0.007 0.001 0.001 0.004 0.947 0.002 0.002 0.021 0.003 0.002 0.006 0.003 10
Oroqen Eurasia Eastern Asia 0.001 0.002 0.003 0.002 0.001 0.005 0.893 0.002 0.007 0.030 0.005 0.001 0.022 0.027 9
She Eurasia Eastern Asia 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.005 0.963 0.001 0.002 0.011 0.004 0.001 0.005 0.003 10
Tujia Eurasia Eastern Asia 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.002 0.002 0.006 0.942 0.001 0.003 0.017 0.004 0.002 0.009 0.008 10
Tu Eurasia Eastern Asia 0.002 0.002 0.001 0.003 0.002 0.007 0.866 0.002 0.004 0.068 0.004 0.002 0.026 0.010 10
Xibo Eurasia Eastern Asia 0.001 0.001 0.003 0.002 0.002 0.005 0.853 0.001 0.004 0.057 0.004 0.001 0.048 0.019 9
Yi Eurasia Eastern Asia 0.001 0.002 0.005 0.001 0.002 0.007 0.910 0.002 0.005 0.044 0.004 0.002 0.009 0.005 10
Mongola Eurasia Eastern Asia 0.001 0.002 0.002 0.002 0.001 0.008 0.849 0.001 0.008 0.062 0.004 0.003 0.040 0.019 10
Naxi Eurasia Eastern Asia 0.001 0.002 0.003 0.002 0.002 0.008 0.907 0.002 0.004 0.040 0.004 0.002 0.019 0.005 9
Cambodian Eurasia Southeastern Asia 0.002 0.002 0.017 0.002 0.004 0.011 0.820 0.001 0.004 0.089 0.014 0.002 0.025 0.007 10
Japanese Eurasia Eastern Asia 0.001 0.002 0.002 0.003 0.002 0.007 0.933 0.002 0.004 0.020 0.004 0.002 0.007 0.010 29
Yakut Eurasia Eastern Asia 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.002 0.001 0.006 0.798 0.001 0.003 0.036 0.003 0.002 0.123 0.023 25
Melanesian Oceania Melanesia 0.001 0.001 0.621 0.001 0.001 0.005 0.339 0.001 0.002 0.017 0.002 0.001 0.005 0.003 11
Papuan Oceania Melanesia 0.001 0.001 0.854 0.001 0.001 0.003 0.099 0.001 0.002 0.028 0.002 0.001 0.003 0.003 17
Australian Oceania Australia 0.001 0.002 0.440 0.002 0.001 0.005 0.142 0.001 0.005 0.234 0.004 0.001 0.161 0.001 10
Karitiana America South America 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.002 0.010 0.000 0.001 0.006 0.001 0.000 0.001 0.978 14
Surui America South America 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.001 0.008 0.000 0.001 0.005 0.001 0.000 0.001 0.981 8
Columbian America South America 0.000 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.004 0.143 0.001 0.001 0.036 0.002 0.002 0.013 0.794 7
Maya America Central America 0.001 0.001 0.005 0.002 0.001 0.011 0.177 0.001 0.003 0.025 0.006 0.002 0.100 0.665 21
Pima America Central America 0.000 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.000 0.003 0.170 0.001 0.001 0.012 0.002 0.001 0.010 0.799 14
Maximum 0.627 0.567 0.854 0.477 0.806 0.935 0.963 0.671 0.688 0.929 0.788 0.646 0.919 0.981
Population Name Mbugu
Chadic
Saharan Cushitic
Eastern
Bantu
Nilo
Saharan
Saharan
/Dogon Fulani
Western
Bantu
S.African 
Khoesan
/Mbuti
Niger
Kordofanian Sandawe
Central
Sudanic Hadza W.Pygmy n
Table S9.  Proportion of AACs from the Africa Structure Run at K=14
Beja_Banuamir 0.001 0.035 0.678 0.005 0.020 0.185 0.007 0.009 0.003 0.039 0.005 0.009 0.002 0.003 23
Beja_Hadandawa 0.001 0.035 0.651 0.004 0.023 0.213 0.010 0.007 0.002 0.035 0.004 0.007 0.002 0.004 19
Mozabite 0.001 0.013 0.352 0.005 0.006 0.510 0.019 0.009 0.003 0.061 0.003 0.011 0.003 0.003 29
Mandinka 0.003 0.045 0.022 0.006 0.008 0.005 0.025 0.373 0.006 0.481 0.007 0.013 0.002 0.007 22
Dogon 0.218 0.009 0.007 0.004 0.006 0.551 0.001 0.007 0.036 0.115 0.038 0.005 0.001 0.002 9
Dioula 0.001 0.050 0.018 0.006 0.006 0.003 0.005 0.138 0.002 0.728 0.006 0.029 0.002 0.004 5
Ashanti 0.002 0.035 0.015 0.009 0.015 0.003 0.004 0.191 0.006 0.671 0.006 0.033 0.003 0.007 15
Brong 0.001 0.043 0.021 0.006 0.010 0.002 0.009 0.222 0.003 0.644 0.004 0.028 0.002 0.004 26
Hausa_Nigeria 0.004 0.086 0.029 0.010 0.015 0.005 0.019 0.044 0.004 0.711 0.008 0.055 0.002 0.007 16
Fulani_Nigeria 0.001 0.070 0.089 0.009 0.021 0.029 0.376 0.020 0.003 0.308 0.005 0.064 0.001 0.003 4
Yoruba 0.001 0.030 0.015 0.006 0.010 0.005 0.003 0.141 0.003 0.748 0.007 0.026 0.002 0.004 25
Yoruba 0.001 0.027 0.021 0.008 0.009 0.003 0.005 0.142 0.006 0.726 0.007 0.036 0.002 0.005 22
Igala 0.001 0.037 0.021 0.007 0.015 0.002 0.002 0.072 0.005 0.788 0.011 0.026 0.003 0.008 17
Igbo 0.002 0.023 0.019 0.007 0.013 0.003 0.004 0.100 0.006 0.760 0.011 0.039 0.002 0.010 28
Gwari 0.002 0.056 0.028 0.007 0.017 0.004 0.011 0.069 0.004 0.725 0.007 0.061 0.002 0.006 22
Bassange 0.001 0.064 0.015 0.006 0.011 0.006 0.005 0.107 0.004 0.742 0.006 0.025 0.003 0.004 20
Koma 0.002 0.037 0.018 0.005 0.082 0.025 0.029 0.013 0.051 0.511 0.013 0.207 0.003 0.003 12
Mada 0.001 0.591 0.023 0.007 0.018 0.002 0.004 0.012 0.004 0.309 0.006 0.014 0.002 0.007 28
Ouldeme 0.001 0.580 0.023 0.007 0.013 0.004 0.005 0.021 0.005 0.311 0.006 0.012 0.002 0.009 26
Giziga 0.003 0.442 0.033 0.008 0.025 0.003 0.007 0.019 0.007 0.390 0.007 0.049 0.002 0.004 24
Mandara 0.001 0.446 0.045 0.009 0.047 0.005 0.023 0.026 0.006 0.347 0.008 0.029 0.002 0.006 26
Kotoko 0.001 0.464 0.066 0.007 0.043 0.016 0.012 0.032 0.005 0.291 0.005 0.042 0.003 0.012 17
Zulgo 0.002 0.559 0.024 0.006 0.019 0.002 0.004 0.008 0.003 0.344 0.004 0.012 0.002 0.011 22
Podokwo 0.002 0.576 0.023 0.008 0.017 0.002 0.004 0.014 0.004 0.312 0.005 0.023 0.003 0.007 30
Massa 0.001 0.405 0.042 0.008 0.090 0.001 0.006 0.014 0.004 0.368 0.008 0.044 0.004 0.004 15
Hausa_Cameroon 0.001 0.182 0.043 0.012 0.016 0.006 0.027 0.030 0.007 0.593 0.006 0.065 0.003 0.011 27
Baggara 0.002 0.302 0.187 0.011 0.091 0.029 0.092 0.020 0.004 0.227 0.007 0.018 0.002 0.008 23
Fulani_Cameroon 0.001 0.224 0.062 0.006 0.020 0.022 0.299 0.028 0.004 0.299 0.007 0.021 0.002 0.005 41
Fulani_Mbororo 0.002 0.027 0.062 0.004 0.007 0.034 0.647 0.022 0.002 0.168 0.008 0.015 0.001 0.002 13
Tupuri 0.002 0.382 0.036 0.009 0.046 0.003 0.004 0.031 0.005 0.420 0.007 0.048 0.002 0.005 22
Baka 0.001 0.013 0.013 0.005 0.009 0.001 0.003 0.006 0.003 0.210 0.005 0.012 0.002 0.718 48
Bakola 0.002 0.014 0.011 0.007 0.008 0.001 0.002 0.006 0.007 0.258 0.012 0.005 0.003 0.664 42
Bedzan 0.001 0.011 0.014 0.008 0.010 0.002 0.004 0.021 0.005 0.427 0.006 0.009 0.003 0.479 17
Mvae 0.002 0.021 0.032 0.010 0.022 0.003 0.003 0.008 0.012 0.808 0.011 0.016 0.003 0.050 24
Ngumba 0.002 0.019 0.031 0.019 0.018 0.002 0.006 0.009 0.008 0.772 0.014 0.018 0.004 0.079 27
Zime 0.002 0.045 0.028 0.022 0.017 0.002 0.003 0.018 0.007 0.740 0.022 0.026 0.004 0.066 30
Bamoun 0.002 0.035 0.027 0.015 0.019 0.002 0.011 0.020 0.007 0.811 0.012 0.024 0.001 0.015 31
Banen 0.003 0.017 0.029 0.031 0.021 0.003 0.004 0.020 0.011 0.817 0.010 0.015 0.003 0.016 25
Bafia 0.002 0.029 0.026 0.014 0.018 0.002 0.005 0.013 0.010 0.824 0.011 0.023 0.004 0.019 30
Lemande 0.002 0.026 0.020 0.015 0.014 0.003 0.004 0.007 0.006 0.862 0.009 0.012 0.004 0.015 26
Batanga 0.004 0.028 0.024 0.035 0.015 0.002 0.005 0.011 0.010 0.806 0.011 0.017 0.002 0.032 20
Iyassa 0.004 0.024 0.032 0.033 0.015 0.012 0.003 0.023 0.009 0.792 0.011 0.011 0.003 0.029 37
Population Name Mbugu
Chadic
Saharan Cushitic
Eastern
Bantu
Nilo
Saharan
Saharan
/Dogon Fulani
Western
Bantu
S.African 
Khoesan
/Mbuti
Niger
Kordofanian Sandawe
Central
Sudanic Hadza W.Pygmy n
Table S9.  Proportion of AACs from the Africa Structure Run at K=14
Fang 0.002 0.022 0.030 0.012 0.021 0.002 0.004 0.012 0.009 0.803 0.011 0.009 0.004 0.059 19
Mabea 0.001 0.023 0.021 0.010 0.018 0.003 0.003 0.011 0.012 0.800 0.010 0.013 0.002 0.072 13
Yambassa 0.001 0.034 0.025 0.013 0.023 0.003 0.005 0.010 0.012 0.826 0.016 0.017 0.002 0.013 17
Tikar_South 0.005 0.036 0.024 0.020 0.015 0.002 0.007 0.018 0.013 0.785 0.010 0.035 0.003 0.026 21
Tikar_North 0.003 0.038 0.030 0.014 0.018 0.002 0.006 0.030 0.012 0.771 0.014 0.043 0.002 0.018 13
Ntumu 0.002 0.030 0.023 0.019 0.013 0.004 0.003 0.005 0.007 0.848 0.010 0.007 0.006 0.024 11
Bulu 0.002 0.033 0.025 0.018 0.018 0.002 0.004 0.014 0.010 0.801 0.012 0.021 0.003 0.036 22
Eton 0.005 0.033 0.019 0.008 0.029 0.003 0.015 0.025 0.003 0.787 0.008 0.026 0.005 0.034 4
Wimbum 0.002 0.023 0.038 0.015 0.020 0.002 0.003 0.019 0.008 0.812 0.018 0.026 0.003 0.011 15
Batie 0.001 0.029 0.019 0.028 0.019 0.002 0.004 0.034 0.012 0.803 0.010 0.027 0.001 0.011 16
Ewondo 0.001 0.045 0.017 0.015 0.013 0.001 0.002 0.006 0.004 0.827 0.010 0.014 0.001 0.043 3
Kanuri 0.004 0.342 0.056 0.014 0.058 0.004 0.024 0.034 0.006 0.390 0.010 0.047 0.003 0.007 31
Biaka 0.001 0.019 0.014 0.010 0.009 0.002 0.002 0.024 0.015 0.167 0.007 0.022 0.001 0.706 23
Mbum 0.002 0.092 0.015 0.005 0.020 0.002 0.005 0.019 0.005 0.589 0.006 0.234 0.002 0.004 13
Yakoma 0.003 0.133 0.019 0.016 0.031 0.003 0.004 0.036 0.011 0.584 0.015 0.093 0.003 0.048 6
Gbaya 0.001 0.090 0.029 0.010 0.033 0.001 0.004 0.016 0.006 0.643 0.003 0.151 0.002 0.012 15
Laka 0.001 0.102 0.022 0.007 0.015 0.002 0.006 0.035 0.006 0.533 0.005 0.254 0.002 0.008 33
Ngambaye 0.002 0.170 0.022 0.009 0.025 0.003 0.006 0.021 0.004 0.514 0.005 0.213 0.002 0.006 30
Kaba 0.001 0.098 0.026 0.011 0.015 0.003 0.004 0.025 0.004 0.541 0.006 0.259 0.002 0.006 27
Bulala 0.001 0.438 0.099 0.005 0.155 0.008 0.015 0.029 0.005 0.185 0.008 0.044 0.002 0.006 15
Kanembou 0.002 0.345 0.179 0.008 0.081 0.016 0.025 0.018 0.008 0.256 0.006 0.049 0.002 0.006 5
Sara_various 0.001 0.158 0.035 0.008 0.036 0.003 0.006 0.024 0.004 0.548 0.007 0.162 0.002 0.007 27
Baluba 0.001 0.018 0.011 0.024 0.022 0.002 0.002 0.055 0.009 0.772 0.020 0.040 0.002 0.024 6
Kongo 0.003 0.029 0.023 0.059 0.013 0.003 0.003 0.018 0.007 0.795 0.015 0.015 0.002 0.017 17
Barega 0.001 0.040 0.022 0.031 0.023 0.001 0.003 0.058 0.048 0.686 0.055 0.015 0.003 0.014 4
Mbuti 0.001 0.010 0.020 0.004 0.033 0.001 0.002 0.026 0.606 0.055 0.010 0.012 0.004 0.216 13
Tutsi/Hutu 0.002 0.014 0.186 0.144 0.039 0.003 0.002 0.022 0.011 0.526 0.012 0.019 0.002 0.017 8
Dinka 0.002 0.253 0.054 0.007 0.552 0.001 0.003 0.015 0.004 0.062 0.007 0.031 0.003 0.006 17
Nuer 0.003 0.234 0.078 0.008 0.547 0.002 0.004 0.015 0.006 0.068 0.007 0.018 0.002 0.008 18
Shilluk 0.006 0.224 0.062 0.007 0.518 0.003 0.004 0.007 0.005 0.109 0.006 0.039 0.005 0.005 15
Nyimang 0.003 0.255 0.154 0.010 0.393 0.011 0.011 0.011 0.022 0.086 0.008 0.028 0.001 0.006 12
Hadza 0.002 0.013 0.071 0.054 0.012 0.003 0.003 0.007 0.005 0.149 0.011 0.009 0.657 0.005 63
Sandawe 0.001 0.014 0.223 0.017 0.012 0.006 0.004 0.008 0.006 0.090 0.600 0.011 0.004 0.005 51
Iraqw 0.002 0.016 0.767 0.038 0.012 0.002 0.004 0.011 0.006 0.065 0.042 0.014 0.008 0.012 46
Burunge 0.002 0.014 0.394 0.192 0.015 0.004 0.003 0.013 0.012 0.153 0.152 0.017 0.011 0.018 22
Fiome 0.003 0.026 0.669 0.083 0.022 0.005 0.007 0.011 0.009 0.082 0.045 0.020 0.011 0.008 22
Mbugu 0.320 0.021 0.392 0.042 0.021 0.003 0.003 0.007 0.004 0.160 0.009 0.010 0.002 0.004 22
Maasai 0.002 0.049 0.468 0.065 0.159 0.008 0.004 0.009 0.011 0.175 0.025 0.011 0.007 0.009 36
Akie 0.006 0.022 0.602 0.021 0.049 0.007 0.005 0.009 0.011 0.139 0.106 0.008 0.005 0.008 23
Datog 0.002 0.044 0.632 0.042 0.086 0.004 0.007 0.014 0.009 0.105 0.020 0.022 0.006 0.008 54
Turu 0.002 0.023 0.329 0.150 0.017 0.005 0.007 0.013 0.015 0.274 0.134 0.011 0.008 0.012 32
Sukuma 0.002 0.015 0.111 0.255 0.021 0.003 0.004 0.005 0.015 0.515 0.014 0.022 0.012 0.006 10
Population Name Mbugu
Chadic
Saharan Cushitic
Eastern
Bantu
Nilo
Saharan
Saharan
/Dogon Fulani
Western
Bantu
S.African 
Khoesan
/Mbuti
Niger
Kordofanian Sandawe
Central
Sudanic Hadza W.Pygmy n
Table S9.  Proportion of AACs from the Africa Structure Run at K=14
Gogo 0.001 0.016 0.221 0.192 0.017 0.002 0.004 0.017 0.019 0.374 0.108 0.013 0.007 0.007 13
Mbugwe 0.004 0.017 0.253 0.265 0.016 0.003 0.004 0.012 0.012 0.349 0.031 0.019 0.005 0.011 21
Rangi 0.002 0.022 0.299 0.251 0.013 0.006 0.004 0.014 0.013 0.289 0.059 0.013 0.005 0.010 36
Sambaa 0.021 0.014 0.200 0.230 0.016 0.005 0.004 0.007 0.009 0.452 0.017 0.016 0.002 0.007 18
Pare 0.025 0.015 0.160 0.203 0.014 0.003 0.004 0.007 0.010 0.516 0.020 0.014 0.003 0.007 23
Gabra 0.002 0.042 0.765 0.006 0.056 0.037 0.007 0.007 0.010 0.038 0.009 0.014 0.002 0.005 17
Borana 0.004 0.041 0.734 0.016 0.054 0.024 0.006 0.012 0.008 0.058 0.017 0.016 0.003 0.007 32
Wata 0.003 0.060 0.732 0.008 0.065 0.007 0.010 0.015 0.006 0.059 0.012 0.015 0.003 0.007 6
Rendille 0.001 0.043 0.758 0.005 0.072 0.033 0.005 0.010 0.004 0.046 0.004 0.013 0.002 0.004 28
El_Molo 0.001 0.047 0.532 0.011 0.249 0.006 0.004 0.014 0.007 0.089 0.019 0.012 0.002 0.007 16
Yaaku 0.001 0.025 0.624 0.036 0.180 0.004 0.005 0.009 0.006 0.084 0.012 0.008 0.002 0.005 19
Maasai_Mumonyot 0.001 0.037 0.498 0.029 0.224 0.012 0.008 0.017 0.010 0.113 0.028 0.009 0.007 0.007 12
Maasai_Il'gwesi 0.003 0.037 0.505 0.063 0.201 0.006 0.007 0.012 0.004 0.122 0.013 0.014 0.005 0.007 21
Dorobo 0.002 0.044 0.490 0.062 0.187 0.004 0.006 0.008 0.010 0.116 0.038 0.015 0.007 0.011 10
Tugen 0.002 0.037 0.324 0.011 0.500 0.005 0.008 0.012 0.004 0.060 0.007 0.018 0.005 0.007 22
Samburu 0.001 0.049 0.580 0.025 0.203 0.012 0.002 0.012 0.009 0.069 0.012 0.015 0.003 0.007 18
Marakwet 0.003 0.015 0.314 0.014 0.563 0.002 0.003 0.006 0.005 0.043 0.011 0.006 0.007 0.007 14
Sengwer 0.001 0.030 0.325 0.012 0.530 0.004 0.004 0.007 0.005 0.052 0.010 0.010 0.004 0.007 21
Okiek 0.002 0.017 0.502 0.017 0.293 0.003 0.009 0.008 0.007 0.097 0.026 0.008 0.005 0.006 22
Nandi 0.001 0.027 0.311 0.058 0.353 0.005 0.006 0.010 0.005 0.185 0.009 0.018 0.002 0.009 11
Sabaot 0.001 0.032 0.203 0.067 0.391 0.003 0.004 0.017 0.008 0.215 0.018 0.025 0.008 0.008 20
Turkana 0.002 0.107 0.248 0.050 0.364 0.004 0.004 0.022 0.012 0.125 0.013 0.033 0.005 0.010 26
Pokot 0.001 0.039 0.306 0.013 0.543 0.003 0.003 0.007 0.008 0.050 0.009 0.008 0.003 0.007 23
Maasai Ilchamus 0.002 0.031 0.459 0.032 0.307 0.013 0.006 0.016 0.006 0.090 0.012 0.016 0.004 0.007 27
Luo 0.002 0.045 0.044 0.236 0.094 0.002 0.005 0.013 0.013 0.501 0.011 0.020 0.004 0.010 28
Bantu_Kenya 0.002 0.024 0.069 0.222 0.093 0.006 0.004 0.043 0.022 0.476 0.013 0.013 0.002 0.012 11
Kikuyu 0.007 0.034 0.315 0.163 0.073 0.004 0.009 0.020 0.013 0.306 0.021 0.023 0.002 0.010 22
Luhya 0.002 0.026 0.048 0.272 0.097 0.003 0.006 0.008 0.010 0.484 0.018 0.017 0.003 0.008 17
Burji 0.001 0.025 0.710 0.030 0.034 0.016 0.010 0.019 0.017 0.068 0.021 0.024 0.005 0.021 24
Konso 0.005 0.036 0.731 0.012 0.033 0.015 0.002 0.015 0.017 0.041 0.031 0.024 0.007 0.031 14
Beta_Israel 0.003 0.022 0.681 0.006 0.027 0.170 0.006 0.009 0.014 0.030 0.009 0.011 0.002 0.009 17
Cape Mixed Ancestry 0.002 0.008 0.253 0.017 0.006 0.264 0.007 0.018 0.262 0.128 0.009 0.011 0.003 0.011 39
San 0.001 0.005 0.030 0.003 0.003 0.002 0.001 0.003 0.873 0.015 0.005 0.003 0.006 0.050 6
!Xun/Khoe 0.004 0.007 0.017 0.003 0.011 0.002 0.002 0.011 0.777 0.089 0.010 0.013 0.004 0.049 8
Xhosa 0.004 0.012 0.028 0.035 0.010 0.013 0.004 0.005 0.412 0.454 0.010 0.007 0.002 0.006 28
Venda 0.014 0.017 0.015 0.036 0.006 0.014 0.004 0.005 0.192 0.670 0.005 0.009 0.001 0.011 13
Bantu_South 0.001 0.016 0.021 0.070 0.011 0.002 0.003 0.024 0.208 0.621 0.007 0.007 0.002 0.007 8
Max 0.320 0.591 0.767 0.272 0.563 0.551 0.647 0.373 0.873 0.862 0.600 0.259 0.657 0.718
 23
Supplemental references 
 
S1. S. A. Miller, D. D. Dykes, H. F. Polesky, Nucleic Acids Res 16, 1215 (Feb 11, 
1988). 
S2. http://www.tau.ac.il/medicine/NLGIP/catalog.htm. 
S3.
 http://research.marshfieldclinic.org/genetics/GenotypingData_Statistics/hu
manDiversityPanel.asp. 
S4. N. A. Rosenberg et al., PLoS Genet 1, e70 (Dec, 2005). 
S5. N. A. Rosenberg et al., Science 298, 2381 (Dec 20, 2002). 
S6. N. A. Rosenberg et al., PLoS Genet 2, e215 (Dec, 2006). 
S7. M. P. Epstein, W. L. Duren, M. Boehnke, Am J Hum Genet 67, 1219 (Nov, 2000). 
S8. N. A. Rosenberg, Ann Hum Genet 70, 841 (Nov, 2006). 
S9. N. Patterson, A. L. Price, D. Reich, PLoS Genet 2, e190 (Dec, 2006). 
S10. http://www.graphviz.org. 
S11. D. B. Goldstein, A. Ruiz Linares, L. L. Cavalli-Sforza, M. W. Feldman, Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A 92, 6723 (Jul 18, 1995). 
S12. http://evolution.genetics.washington.edu/phylip.html. 
S13. L. L. Cavalli-Sforza, A. Piazza, P. Menozzi, J. Mountain, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 
A 85, 6002 (Aug, 1988). 
S14. M. Nei, A. K. Roychoudhury, Mol Biol Evol 10, 927 (Sep, 1993). 
S15. A. M. Bowcock et al., Nature 368, 455 (Mar 31, 1994). 
S16. M. Nei, N. Takezaki, Mol Biol Evol 13, 170 (Jan, 1996). 
S17. A. M. Valdes, M. Slatkin, N. B. Freimer, Genetics 133, 737 (1993). 
S18. P. O. Lewis, D. V. Zaykin. (2001). 
S19. M. Nei, Molecular Evolutionary Genetics.  (Columbia University Press, New 
York, 1987). 
S20. M. Kimura, T. Ohta, Genetics 75, 199 (1973). 
S21. Z. A. Szpiech, M. Jakobsson, N. A. Rosenberg, Bioinformatics 24, 2498 (Nov 1, 
2008). 
S22. B. S. Wier, Genetic data analysis II: Methods for discrete population genetic 
data.,  (Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, MA, ed. 2nd 1996). 
S23. http://www.ethnologue.com. 
S24. H. M. Cann et al., Science 296, 261 (Apr 12, 2002). 
S25. S. Ramachandran et al., Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102, 15942 (Nov 1, 2005). 
S26. O. Francois, S. Ancelet, G. Guillot, Genetics 174, 805 (Oct, 2006). 
S27. http://genepath.med.harvard.edu/~reich/Software.htm. 
S28. http://pritch.bsd.uchicago.edu/structure.html. 
S29. J. K. Pritchard, M. Stephens, P. Donnelly, Genetics 155, 945 (Jun, 2000). 
S30. J. S. Friedlaender et al., PLoS Genet 4, e19 (Jan, 2008). 
S31. D. Falush, M. Stephens, J. K. Pritchard, Genetics 164, 1567 (Aug, 2003). 
S32. M. Jakobsson, N. A. Rosenberg, Bioinformatics 23, 1801 (Jul 15, 2007). 
S33. http://rosenberglab.bioinformatics.med.umich.edu/distruct.html. 
S34. N. A. Rosenberg, Molecular Ecology Notes 4, 134 (2004). 
S35. S. S. Shapiro, M. B. Wilk, Biometrika 52, 591 (1965). 
 24
S36. R. R. Sokal, F. J. Rohlf, Introduction to Biostatistics.  (Freeman and Company, 
San Francisco, ed. 2nd, 1987), pp. xii, 363  
S37. SAS. (SAS Institute Inc, Cary, NC, 2004). 
S38. C. Ehret, A Comparative Historical Reconstruction of Proto-Nilo-Saharan. . 
Sprache und Geschichte in Afrika. SUGIA-Supplements (Rüdiger Köppe Verlag, 
Cologne, 2001), vol. 12, pp. 633. 
S39. C. Ehret, Reconstructing Proto-Afroasiatic (Proto-Afrasian) : vowels, tone, 
consonants, and vocabulary. University of California publications in linguistics v. 
126 (University of California Press, Berkeley, 1995), pp. xvii, 557. 
S40. P. Newman, Journal of African Languages. 5, 5 (1977). 
S41. M. L. Bender, Anthropological Linguistics 13, 165 (1971). 
S42. C. Ehret, Sprache und Geschichte in Afrika 8, 7 (1987). 
S43. C. Ehret, in In Hot Pursuit of Language in Prehistory, J. Bengtson, Ed. (John 
Benjamins, Amsterdam, 2008),  pp. 140-160. 
S44. C. Ehret, Studies in African Linguistics 22, 211 (1991). 
S45. C. Ehret, The historical reconstruction of Southern Cushitic phonology and 
vocabulary. Kölner Beiträge zur Afrikanistik 5. Bd. (Reimer, Berlin, 1980), pp. 
407. 
S46. K. Williamson, R. Blench, in African Languages: an introduction, B. Heine, D. 
Nurse, Eds. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000),  pp. 11-42. 
S47. http://www.history.ucla.edu/ehret/. 
S48. Y. Bastin, A. Coupez, M. Mann, Continuity and divergence in the Bantu 
languages : perspectives from a lexicostatistic study. Annalen. 
Menswetenschappen = Annales. Sciences humaines (Musée royal de l'Afrique 
centrale, Tervuren, Belgium, 1999), pp. vi, 225. 
S49. W. A. A. Wilson, in in The Niger-Congo Languages, J. Bendor-Samuel, Ed. 
(University Press of America, Lanham, MD, 1989),  pp. 81-104. 
S50. T. Naden, in in Niger-Congo Languages J. Bendor-Samuel, Ed. (University Press 
of America, Lanham, MD, 1989),  pp. 140-168. 
S51. K. A. Klieman, "The Pygmies were our compass" : Bantu and Batwa in the 
history of west central Africa, early times to c. 1900 C.E. Social history of Africa 
(Heinemann, Portsmouth, NH, 2003), pp. xxxiv, 253. 
S52. D. E. Saxon, in in The Archaeological and Linguistic Reconstruction of African 
History, C. Ehret, M. Posnansky, Eds. (University of California, Berkeley, 1982),  
pp. 39-56. 
S53. R. G. Armstrong, The Study of West African Languages (Ibadan University Press, 
Ibadan, 1964), pp. 74. 
S54. L. E. Wilson, Ph.D. diss, University of California (1980). 
S55. R. Vossen, The Eastern Nilotic Languages (Dietrich Reimer Verlag, Berlin, 
1982), pp. 512. 
S56. R. Thelwall, in in The Archaeological and Linguistic Reconstruction of African 
History, C. Ehret, M. Posnansky, Eds. (University of California, Berkeley, 1982),  
pp. 39-56. 
S57. C. Ehret, in Culture History in the Southern Sudan, J. Mack, P. Robertshaw, Eds. 
(British Institute in Eastern Africa, Nairobi, 1983),  pp. 19-48. 
S58. B. Heine, The Kuliak Languages.  ( EAPH, Nairobi, 1976), pp. x, 79. 
 25
S59. J. Distefano, Ph.D. diss., University of California (1985). 
S60. D. E. Saxon, Ph.D diss., University of California (1980). 
S61. R. Thelwall, Ph.D. diss., New University of Ulster (1981). 
S62. C. Ehret, in Archaeology of Early Northeastern Africa, M. Chlodnicki, K. 
Kroeper, Eds. (Poznan Archaeological Museum, Studies in African Archaeology, 
Poznan, Poland, 2006), vol. 9, pp. 1019-1055. 
S63. A. Militarev, in Time Depth in Historical Linguistics, C. Renfrew, A. McMahon, 
L. Trask, Eds. (McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, Cambridge, 
2000), vol. 1, pp. 267-307. 
S64. C. Ehret, Ufahamu 26, 54 (1997). 
S65. C. Ehret, in The Archeological and Linguistic Reconstruction of African History, 
C. Ehret, M. Posnansky, Eds. (University of California Press, Berkeley, 1982),  
pp. 158-181. 
S66. S. M. Embleton, Ed., Statistics in Historical Linguistics,  (Studienverlag 
Brockmeyer, Bochum, Germany, 1986), pp. viii, 194. 
S67. E. T. Wood et al., Eur J Hum Genet 13, 867 (2005). 
S68. J. H. Greenberg, Studies in African Linguistic Classification (Compass Press 
Bradford, CT, 1955). 
S69. C. Ehret, The civilizations of Africa : a history to 1800.  (University Press of 
Virginia, Charlottesville, 2002), pp. xii, 480. 
S70. C. Ehret, S. O. Keita, P. Newman, Science 306, 1680; author reply 1680 (Dec 3, 
2004). 
S71. L. Lim, Ph.D. diss., Brown University (1992). 
S72. T. Güldemann, M. Stoneking, Annu Rev. Anthropol. 37, 93 (2008). 
S73. B. Sands, in Language, identity and conceptualization among the Khoisan, M. 
Schladt, Ed. (Rudiger Kupper Verlag, Koln, 1998), vol. Bd 15, pp. 266 - 283. 
S74. E. D. Elderkin, Sprache und Geschichte in Afrika 4, 67 (1982). 
S75. M. Kimmel et al., Genetics 148, 1921 (Apr, 1998). 
S76. J. P. King, M. Kimmel, R. Chakraborty, Mol Biol Evol 17, 1859 (Dec, 2000). 
S77. M. C. Campbell, S. A. Tishkoff, Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet 9, 403 (2008). 
S78. P. Forster, S. Matsumura, Science 308, 965 (May 13, 2005). 
S79. M. Jakobsson et al., Nature 451, 998 (Feb 21, 2008). 
S80. J. Z. Li et al., Science 319, 1100 (Feb 22, 2008). 
S81. C. Ehret, The International Journal of African Historical Studies 34, 5 (2001). 
S82. J. L. Newman, The Peopling of Africa.  (Yale University Press, New Haven and 
London, 1997), pp. xiv, 235. 
S83. M. Mous, in Mixed languages: 15 case studies in language intertwining, P. 
Bakker, M. Mous, Eds. (IFOTT, Amsterdam, 1994),  pp. 175-201. 
S84. C. Ehret, An African Classical Age : Eastern and Southern Africa in World 
History, 1000 B.C. to A.D. 400.  (University Press of Virginia, Charlottesville, 
1998), pp. xvii, 354. 
S85. C. Ehret, Southern African Humanities 30, 7 (2008). 
S86. C. Ehret, in African Historical Demography, C. Fyfe, D. McMaster, Eds. 
(University of Edinburgh Centre of African Studies, Edinburgh, 1981), vol. 2, pp. 
802. 
 26
S87. C. Ehret, in Early Human Kinship: From Sex to Social Reproduction, N. J. Allen, 
H. Callan, R. Dunbar, W. James, Eds. (Blackwell, Oxford, UK, 2008),  pp. 200-
231,  259-269. 
S88. V. Cerny, A. Salas, M. Hajek, M. Zaloudkova, R. Brdicka, Ann Hum Genet 71, 
433 (Jul, 2007). 
S89. H. Y. Hassan, P. A. Underhill, L. L. Cavalli-Sforza, M. E. Ibrahim, Am J Phys 
Anthropol 137, 316 (Nov, 2008). 
S90. R. E. Bereir et al., Eur J Hum Genet 15, 1183 (Nov, 2007). 
S91. C. Ehret, in West African Linguistics: Studies in Honor of Russell G. Schuh, P. 
Newman, L. Hyman, Eds. (Ohio State University, Columbus, 2006),  pp. 56-66. 
S92. V. Cerny et al., BMC Evol Biol 9, 63 (Mar 23, 2009). 
S93. V. Cerny et al., Hum Biol 78, 9 (Feb, 2006). 
S94. C. A. Mulcare et al., Am J Hum Genet 74, 1102 (Jun, 2004). 
S95. C. Bailey, Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient 28, 20 
(1985). 
S96. Y. Lev, International Journal of Middle East Studies 19, 337 (1987). 
S97. A. Levanoni, Studia Islamica 72, 121 (1990). 
S98. B. J. Walker, Near Eastern Archaeology 62, 202 (1999). 
S99. A. F. C. Holl, T. E. Levy, The Biblical Archaeologist 56, 166 (1993). 
S100. T. E. Levy, A. F. C. Holl, Journal of Anthropological Archaelogy 21, 83 (2002). 
S101. B. Lembezat, Ed., Les populations païennes du Nord- Cameroun et de 
l'Adamaoua,  (Press Universitaires de France, Paris, 1961). 
S102. C. Ehret, Ethiopians and East Africans : the problem of contacts. Nairobi 
Historical Studies (East African Publishing House, Nairobi, 1974), pp. 95. 
S103. S. H. Ambrose, Sprache und Geschichte in Afrika 7.2, 11 (1986). 
S104. S. H. Ambrose, Archaeology and linguistic reconstructions of history in Eastern 
Africa. C. Ehret, M. Posnansy, Eds., The Archaeological and Linguistic 
Reconstruction of African History (University of California Press, Berkeley, 
1982), pp. xii, 299. 
S105. S. Feierman, The Shambaa Kingdom.  (University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, 
1974). 
S106. S. G. Thomason, Contact Languages: A wider perspective. S. G. Thomason, Ed.,  
(John Benjamins Publishing Company, Amsterdam/Philadelphia, 1997), pp. xiii, 
506. 
S107. R. Blackburn, In the land of milk and honey: Okiek adaptations to their forests 
and neighbors. S. Kent, Ed., Cultural diversity among twentieth-century foragers: 
an African perspective (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1996), pp. xiv, 
344. 
S108. L. Cronk, Ethnology 41, 27 (2002). 
S109. L. Cronk, From Mukogodo to Maasai: Ethnicity and Cultural Change in Kenya.  
(Westview Press, Boulder CO, 2004). 
S110. C. Ehret, in in Semino-Hamitic Festschrift for, A. B. Dolgopolsky, G. 
Jungraithmayr, G. Takacs, Eds. (Dietrich Reimer, Berlin, 2008),  pp. xii, 378. 
S111. P. Lieberman, R. McCarthy, Expedition 49, 15 (2007). 
S112. C. Ehret, in in Origins: The Story of the Emergence of Humans and Humanity in 
Africa G. Blundell, Ed. (Double Storey, Cape Town, 2006),  pp. 45,47. 
 27
S113. S. Bahuchet, La rencontre des agriculteurs : les Pygmées parmi les peuples 
d'Afrique centrale. Histoire d'une civilisation forestière (Peeters, Paris, 1993), pp. 
173  
S114. S. Bahuchet, Pygmées de Centrafrique : études ethnologiques, historiques et 
linguistiques sur les Pygmées "Ba. Mbenga" (aka/baka) du nord-ouest du bassin 
congolais. Etudes pygmées 3 (SELAF, Paris, 1979), pp. 179  
S115. H. Terashima, African Study Monographs 28, 7 (2003). 
S116. L. L. Cavalli-Sforza, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94, 7719 (Jul 22, 1997). 
S117. S. Wang et al., PLoS Genet 3, e185 (Nov, 2007). 
S118. K. Hunley et al., PLoS Genet 4, e1000239 (Oct, 2008). 
S119. E. M. Belle, G. Barbujani, Am J Phys Anthropol 133, 1137 (Aug, 2007). 
S120. W. E. Welmers, African language structures.  (University of California Press, 
Berkeley, 1974), pp. xi, 488  
S121. E. J. Parra et al., Am J Hum Genet 63, 1839 (Dec, 1998). 
S122. A. Salas et al., Am J Phys Anthropol 128, 855 (Dec, 2005). 
S123. J. M. Lind et al., Hum Genet 120, 713 (Jan, 2007). 
S124. M. W. Smith et al., Am J Hum Genet 74, 1001 (May, 2004). 
S125. E. J. Parra et al., Am J Phys Anthropol 114, 18 (Jan, 2001). 
S126. http://www.slavevoyages.org/tast/index.faces. 
S127. G. T. Nurse, J. S. Weiner, T. Jenkins, The Peoples of Southern Africa and Their 
Affinities.  (Oxford University Press, New York,