Vol 350 • August 16, 1997 469
Artificial neural networks applied to outcome prediction for
colorectal cancer patients in separate institutions
Leonardo Bottaci, Philip J Drew, John E Hartley, Matthew B Hadfield, Ridzuan Farouk, Peter W R Lee, 
Iain M C Macintyre, Graeme S Duthie, John R T Monson
THE LANCET
Introduction
At present, it is extremely difficult to predict whether and
when an individual patient will die after surgical treatment
for colorectal cancer. The only available techniques rely on
the calculation of the risk affecting large groups within the
population as a whole. These methods have been used to
provide predictions based on pathological staging
techniques such as those of Dukes1 and Jass and
colleagues2 and the identification of prognostic indicators
by univariate and multivariate analysis.3 For example, it is
known that after treatment for a Dukes’ C cancer the
chance of surviving at least 5 years is about 50%.1
However, the mean population survival is not a useful
predictor of survival for the individual patient—many
patients with Dukes’ C cancers have survival that deviates
widely from the mean. We applied artificial neural
networks to the analysis of data from patients with
colorectal cancer in an attempt to achieve accurate
predictions of outcome for individual patients.
Methods
Development of a neural network
Design—We decided to use a fully connected multilayer
feedforward network, since the analytical power of this type of
network is good and is well understood.4,5 The networks were
constructed by means of general-purpose neural-network
software6 and executed on a Sun Workstation under UNIX. The
number of units in the input layer was determined by the
number of input data values. A single output unit was used. The
number of units in the remaining middle layer was chosen by
experimentation. Several different networks were constructed
containing varying numbers (two to 15) of units in the middle
layer. The logistic activation function was used with continuous
output on the interval (0, 1).
Training—Data collected prospectively over 5 years on 334
patients treated for colorectal cancer were used to train and
validate the networks. The selected variables (panel) were
separated into categorical, ordinal, or ratio-scale values giving a
total input of 42 clinicopathological variables. The learning rule
used was back propagation of error, which adjusts the internal
Summary
Background Artificial neural networks are computer
programs that can be used to discover complex relations
within data sets. They permit the recognition of patterns in
complex biological data sets that cannot be detected with
conventional linear statistical analysis. One such complex
problem is the prediction of outcome for individual patients
treated for colorectal cancer. Predictions of outcome in
such patients have traditionally been based on population
statistics. However, these predictions have little meaning
for the individual patient. We report the training of neural
networks to predict outcome for individual patients from
one institution and their predictive performance on data
from a different institution in another region.
Methods 5-year follow-up data from 334 patients treated
for colorectal cancer were used to train and validate six
neural networks designed for the prediction of death within
9, 12, 15, 18, 21, and 24 months. The previously trained
12-month neural network was then applied to 2-year follow-
up data from patients from a second institution; outcome
was concealed. No further training of the neural network
was undertaken. The network’s predictions were compared
with those of two consultant colorectal surgeons supplied
with the same data.
Findings All six neural networks were able to achieve
overall accuracy greater than 80% for the prediction of
death for individual patients at institution I within 9, 12,
15, 18, 21, and 24 months. The mean sensitivity and
specificity were 60% and 88%. When the neural network
trained to predict death within 12 months was applied to
data from the second institution, overall accuracy of 90%
(95% CI 84–96) was achieved, compared with the overall
accuracy of the colorectal surgeons of 79% (71–87) and
75% (66–84).
Interpretation The neural networks were able to predict
outcome for individual patients with colorectal cancer
much more accurately than the currently available
clinicopathological methods. Once trained on data from
one institution, the neural networks were able to predict
outcome for patients from an unrelated institution.
Lancet 1997; 350: 469–72
Department of Computer Science, University of Hull (L Bottaci
PhD); University of Hull Academic Surgical Unit, Castle Hill Hospital,
Hull HU16 5JQ (P J Drew FRCSE, J E Hartley FRCS, M B Hadfield FRCS, 
R Farouk FRCSE, P W R Lee FRCS, G S Duthie FRCSE, 
Prof J R T Monson FRCS); and Western General Hospital, Edinburgh,
UK (I M C Macintyre FRCSE)
Correspondence to: Professor John R T Monson
Clinicopathological factors used to train and validate the
artificial neural networks
Patient dependent Clinician dependent
Age Liver metastases on preoperative  
Sex ultrasound scan
Abdominal pain Liver metastases at operation
Altered bowel habit Operation type
Weight loss Surgeon rank
Obstruction Tumour fixity
Palpable mass Involvement of adjacent organs
Mucus per rectum Peritoneal involvement
Bleeding per rectum Tumour perforation
Anaemia Resection judged curative
Family history Anastomosis type
History of inflammatory Blood transfusion
bowel disease Adjuvant therapy
Dukes’ stage
THE LANCET
addition, the neural network was able to produce the
highest likelihood ratio for the period (9 months) in
which a prediction had the lowest probability of being
correct (61%).
The performance of the network previously trained on
the data from institution I was significantly better than
that of the two consultant surgeons when the data for
institution II were presented for analysis (McNemar test
for difference between predicted and actual population,
p=0·18 for neural network versus p=0·0192 and
p=0·0001 for clinician 1 and 2, respectively; table 4). In
particular, there was a much higher probability that the
neural network would correctly predict death. Both the
surgeons and the neural network scored well when
predicting survival, but this result is to be expected since
93% of the patients survived. The likelihood ratio, an
index of the clinical usefulness of the prediction, was far
greater for the neural network than for the clinicians.
Discussion
When dealing with cancer patients, most clinicians avoid
trying to answer the question “How long have I got?”. We
are unable to predict with any degree of accuracy whether
and when the individual patient will die, largely because
of the failure of traditional statistical analysis of
population databases to provide accurate outcome
prediction for the individual patient.
Prediction of outcome for patients with colorectal
tumours that are treated at an early or late stage is simple
both clinically and mathematically, since by far the
majority of patients with Dukes’ A tumours survive,
whereas most of those with established liver metastases
rapidly succumb. Both clinicians and traditional statistics
would correctly identify stage as being the most
important variable for these patients. However, for
Dukes’ B and C tumours the situation is more complex,
and traditional methods break down because of the
influence of a potential multitude of clinical variables.
Advances in computer processing speed and neural
network theory have facilitated the application of neural
networks to the non-linear analysis of complex data in
many different settings, including diagnosis and
prediction of outcome in medicine.9–16
Various other forms of artificial intelligence have also
been used in medicine and surgery with varying degrees
of success. Expert systems are programs that attempt to
encode explicit representations of human expertise.17
They are time-consuming to construct since they require
parameters of the network over the repeated training cycles to
reduce the overall error.5,7 Training was terminated when the sum
of squares error with respect to the validation data set was at a
minimum.We thus took care not to over-fit the training data.
Validation—Of the 334 patients in the training database, 50
were randomly selected for validation and the remaining 284
were used for training. To eliminate any possible bias, each
network was trained and validated with 30 randomly selected
training and validation data sets. The differences in network
performance among these 30 selections were not significant.
Application—100 patients were then randomly selected from a
database of prospective 2-year follow-up data from a second
institution. Patients dying from causes other than colorectal
cancer were excluded, which left a population of 92 patients. A
neural network, trained and validated by means of the data from
institution I to predict death within 12 months, was then used to
predict outcome for this group. No retraining of the network was
permitted. The data presented to the trained neural network
were also presented to two consultant colorectal surgeons who
were asked to predict which individual patients would die within
12 months.
To provide a valid comparison between the clinicians and the
neural network and to give an indication of the clinical
usefulness of the neural networks’ predictions, results are
expressed in terms of overall accuracy (sum of correct
predictions of death or life divided by total number of
predictions), sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative
predictive values, and odds likelihood ratio with 95% CI where
appropriate.8 The likelihood ratio indicates the value of a test for
increasing certainty about prediction or diagnosis. Effectively, the
post-test odds are equivalent to the pretest odds multiplied by
the likelihood ratio, which is calculated as
sensitivity/(12specificity). A McNemar test, a non-parametric
test for two related dichotomous variables, was used to analyse
the relative accuracy of the predictions from clinicians and neural
networks. All statistical analysis was done on SPSS 6.1 for
Windows.
Results
The distribution by Dukes’ stage and relation to survival
for the two data sets are given in tables 1 and 2. The
neural networks were able to achieve an accuracy of
prediction for mortality from colorectal cancer of more
than 80% for all six time periods for patients from
institution I (table 3). The probability that a network
would correctly predict death within a given 3-month
period (positive predictive value) varied from 61% to
71%, but the likelihood ratio remained high (table 3). In
470 Vol 350 • August 16, 1997
Dukes’ stage
A B C D
Initial proportion 14% 46% 37% 3%
Mortality (% of stage group)
9 months 7 8 28 44
12 months 7 11 32 44
15 months 7 13 39 44
18 months 9 13 42 44
21 months 9 16 47 67
24 months 11 18 51 67
Table 1: Distribution by Dukes’ stage and mortality by time and
stage in institution I data set
Dukes’ stage
A B C Unknown
Initial number (% of total) 20 (22%) 35 (38%) 33 (36%) 4 (4%)
Number of deaths 0 0 5* 1†
*At 3, 4, 6, 9, and 11 months. †At 4 months.
Table 2: Distribution by Dukes’ stage and mortality in
institution II data set
Survival period Overall accuracy (%) Sensitivity Specificity Mortality Positive predictive Negative predictive Likelihood ratio
(months) (95% CI) (%) (%) (%) value (%) value (%) (95% CI)
9 82 (72–90) 42 93 21 61 86 6·0 (1·5–21)
12 81 (70–91) 52 90 24 63 86 5·4 (1·7–16)
15 81 (70–91) 60 89 28 68 85 5·6 (2·0–16)
18 81 (70–91) 65 87 29 68 86 5·2 (2·0–13)
21 81 (70–92) 71 86 32 70 86 4·9 (2·0–12)
24 80 (69–91) 71 85 35 71 85 4·7 (2·0–11)
Table 3: Performance of artificial neural networks trained and validated on data from institution I
THE LANCET
protracted discussions with clinical experts and are fragile
in operation. In addition, previous studies have shown
that clinicians are not always aware of the important
relations between variables that a neural network is able
to detect.18 In our study, the networks were more accurate
than the experts, which implies that the complexity of the
system may be beyond the analytical capabilities of a
physician. Early work in Bayesian analysis has been used
for prediction and diagnosis in medicine.9 At that time the
general belief was that a Bayesian classifier could produce
good results only in conditions rarely found in
practice.20–22 Subsequent work has seen the application of
Bayesian inference techniques to neural networks.23
In general, a neural network analysis is potentially more
successful than traditional statistical techniques when the
importance of a given prognostic variable is expressed as
a complex unknown function of the value of the variable,
when the prognostic impact of a variable is influenced by
other prognostic variables, or when the prognostic impact
of a variable varies over time.24 These conditions are
found in complex biological systems. Such systems have
been extensively investigated in mathematics, physics, and
theoretical biology.25 For the purposes of analysis, each
variable can be regarded as a single dimension in a
multidimensional space. Traditional statistical techniques
are particularly suited to the analysis of data with a low
dimensional complexity and linear separation. In two
dimensions, such data can be represented by the drawing
of a straight line between two populations plotted on a
Cartesian graph.26 However, these traditional techniques
are unable to provide such a division when the relation
between variables is governed by a complex
multidimensional non-linear function.4 In these
circumstances a neural network will provide a more
accurate analysis.
There are several potential sources of error in our
study. All the data were analysed retrospectively to permit
the training and validation of the networks and to
establish their ability to predict outcome for patients from
a separate institution. However, the outcome of the 50
randomly selected patients used to validate each neural
network was concealed from the computer. The outcome
for patients from the second institution was not made
known to the team involved in using the neural network
until after the neural network had made its predictions. In
fact, since the operation of the neural network is entirely
automatic once input data are presented, there is no way
to influence its prediction.
The proportion of deaths in the randomly selected
patients from the second institution was only 7%, and the
data on sensitivity must therefore be viewed with caution
until a larger prospective series has been analysed.
However, there were a substantial number of deaths in
the larger training and validation set, and no significant
adverse effect on the overall accuracy was apparent.
We accepted the accuracy of the data received from the
separate institutions, which have their own internal audit
systems. The parallel nature of the analyses performed by
the neural networks enables them to accept a certain
amount of inaccurate data without a serious effect on the
predictive accuracy—a process known as graceful
degradation. In contrast, the performance of expert
systems is often unpredictable if input data are incorrect.
We discarded a variable from the study only if it was
obviously unrelated to survival. This policy was justified
on the grounds that we do not know which variables are
the key factors, and there is some evidence27 that the
neural networks of the type used in this study are able to
reduce automatically the contribution made by variables
of low predictive value. Clinicians, however, are unable to
detect accurately all the important relations within a
complex system.18 Interestingly, when the data from
institution II were subjected to an effectively linear
analysis by utilising a single-layer network, an overall
accuracy of only 75% was achieved, which was similar to
that achieved by the clinicians.
The clinicians were supplied with the data in tabulated
form only and were not able to interview and examine the
patients themselves before making their predictions.
Diagnosis and prediction rely on the processing of
information from all facets of the clinical situation, and
the way th